HLB-TOLERANCE MECHANISM: LESSONS LEARNED FROM THE SUGAR BELLE® MANDARIN AND NOVEL MANAGEMENT PRACTICES







By 
JACOBO ROBLEDO BURITICA







A THESIS PRESENTED TO THE GRADUATE SCHOOL
OF THE UNIVERSITY OF FLORIDA IN PARTIAL FULFILLMENT
OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE OF
MASTER OF SCIENCE

UNIVERSITY OF FLORIDA

2023








© 2023 Jacobo Robledo Buritica



















To my family and friends









ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my family in Colombia, my wife, and son for their unwavering support throughout my academic career. I am grateful to my lab mates for teaching me the techniques necessary to develop my experiment and to my advisors, Amit Levy and Christopher Vincent, for their unconditional support and academic guidance. I would also like to extend my appreciation to the University of Florida CREC and the Department of Plant Pathology for providing me with important knowledge to develop my master's thesis. Without the support of all these individuals and institutions, I would not have been able to achieve my academic goals.

 
TABLE OF CONTENTS

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS	4
LIST OF TABLES	6
LIST OF FIGURES	6
LITERATURE REVIEW	15
Citrus Greening or Huanglongbing: a devastating disease that threatens the citrus industry in the Americas	15
Managing HLB: Tackling an Incurable Disease with Incompletely Understood Vector-Host Interactions and Mechanisms	19
THE SUGAR BELLE MANDARIN MAY EXHIBIT GREATER TOLERANCE TO HLB THROUGH MILD DECREASE IN CARBOHYDRATE EXPORT BUT BOOST IN CO2 FIXATOIN, ENHANCED EXPRESSION OF PLANT DEFENSE ACTIVATORS, AND INCREASE INVESTMENT IN XYLEM VESSELS	25
Introduction	25
Materials and Methods	28
Plant materials and growth conditions	28
14C fixation and export assay	29
Quantification of starch	30
Callose quantification in the phloem	31
Relative gene expression:	32
Assessment of symptom severity	33
Total nucleic acid extraction	34
Relative quantification of CLas genetic material by q-PCR	35
Quantification of anatomical variables	36
Statistical analysis	38
Results	39
The HLB-tolerant cultivar exhibits enhanced 14CO2 fixation and mitigates the reduction in 14C-carbohydrate export.	39
Prevalence of Aggregated Callose Deposits in the Tolerant Cultivar	40
Upregulation of defense response activators in the tolerant cultivar does not correspond to reduced symptoms or CLas relative titer	42
The tolerant cultivar can be distinguished by an increase in the relative xylem area and the preservation of xylem vessel metrics	43
Discussion	46
Carbohydrate dynamics and callose distribution as factors implicated in HLB tolerance	46
Defense responses, rather than symptoms or bacterium titer, may contribute to tolerance	50
Xylem's Potential Role in HLB Tolerance	52
GA AND 2DDG AS INDUCERS OF TOLERANCE IN SUSCEPTIBLE PINEAPPLE SWEET ORANGE:	70
Introduction	70
Materials and Methods	73
Plant materials and growth conditions	73
Gibberellic acid application	73
Growth measurement	74
Application of 2-deoxy-D-glucose (2-DDG)	75
Quantification of starch and relative CLas genetic material	76
Total quantification of callose through fluorescence spectroscopy	77
Statiscal analysis	78
Results	79
Effects of gibberellic acid on growth, shoot development, and morphometric variables in HLB-susceptible pineapple sweet orange trees: overall enhancements observed	79
Dynamic interaction of callose and starch accumulation in citrus leaves: age-specific responses and CLas titer variations under GA and 2-DDG treatments	81
Discussion	83
The role of gibberellic acid in enhancing growth and potentially the tree’s photosynthetic capacity	83
Exploring the Potential Effects of 2-DDG Application in Infected Susceptible Citrus: Enhancing Callose Quantification Techniques for Improved Detection	86
CONCLUDING REMARKS	100
LIST OF REFERENCES	103
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH	120

LIST OF TABLES
Table 2-1 Primers of genes examined in this study.	53
Table 2. Features of the 2-DDG used in the experiment	74

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 2 1. Quantification of phloem transversal plugging in citrus bark peels. A. Object 87 identity files in format HDF5 that are the output of Welker & Levy, 2022 procedure were used as the 88 main input. B. Files were visualized and exported to png using the HDFView tool (v.3.1.4). C. Images 89 were manually rotated until the phloem tissue was perpendicular to the image base and converted to 90 masks using ImageJ. D. Masks were stored as text images, “#” characters indicate pixels with callose 91 deposition and 0 values depicts background pixels with no callose. E. Columns with callose deposits (red) 92 and without callose deposits (green) were counted. F. Calculation of transversal plugging; by default, the 93 total number of columns corresponds to the number of pixels of the picture’s width (1024 pixcels).	52
Figure 2 2. Quantification of phloem and xylem cell morphometrics in ImageJ. A. Raw image. B. Manual labeling of phloem, xylem, and pith boundaries. Pith area [red] corresponds to parenchyma cells in the center of the section, xylem [magenta] corresponds to xylem vessels and fibers, and phloem [yellow] corresponds to phloem parenchyma and sieve element cells excluding phloem fibers. C. Creation of individual masks corresponding to every section applying a color threshold macro. D. Conversion of mask to regions of interests (.roi). E. Conversion of the raw image to 8-bites. F. Overlap of stored regions of interest in the 8-bites converted raw image. G. Application of manual threshold to select cell lumen. H. Creation of the composite selection using XOR operator; Xylem vessels and fibers were selected by subtracting xylem boundaries to the pith area; Magnifier glass depicts a close-up look at the selected area. I. Counting and measuring of cell lumen area; a threshold of 8 um2 was set to exclude xylem fibers from xylem vessels.	55
Figure 2 3 A) 14CO2 fixation of infected plants with respect to healthy plants in the susceptible pineapple (PA) sweet orange and the tolerant Sugar Belle® (SB) mandarin. B) Relative gene expression of Ferredoxin – NADP reductase in leaves of different ages of healthy and infected PA and SB. C) 14C-carbohydrate export of infected plants with respect to healthy plants of PA and SB. D) Starch content of infected and healthy plants of PA and SB. The dashed lines (µ=0) represent the theoretical estimate obtained when values of healthy and infected plants within the same cultivar are equal. Yellow triangle depicts the mean. P-values in A, C, and D were obtained through Welche’s t-test. P-values in B were obtained through Wilcox’s test. In A and C means were compared to µ=0. Old leaves= 273 ± 30 days, medium leaves= 101.4 ± 22 days, and young leaves= 27.1 ± 9 days. Error bars indicate standard error.	56
Figure 2 4. Relative gene expression of Ferredoxin – NADP reductase (Ferr - Cs1g25510) within leaves of the same age of healthy and infected Sugar Belle® P-values were obtained through Welche’s t-test	57
Figure 2 5 Comparison of the relative changes generated by HLB between the susceptible Pineapple (PA) sweet orange and the tolerant Sugar Belle® (SB) mandarin through permutational test of means. Numbers on the SB panel are P values. *= variable compared through two sample t-test. **=variable compared through paired t-test.	58
Figure 2-6 A) Callose counts of infected and healthy plants in the susceptible Pineapple (PA) sweet orange and the tolerant Sugar Belle® (SB) mandarin. B)  Mean size of callose counts of infected and healthy PA and SB. C) Mean total area of callose counts of infected and healthy PA and SB. D) Mean distance to the closest neighbor of callose counts of PA and SB. E) Relative gene expression of callose synthase and glucanase genes in leaves of different ages of healthy and infected PA and SB. F and G) Images of Ilastik callose classification in the phloem of bark peels stained with aniline blue (scale bar= 200 µm) F.I.) Example of healthy PA showing more callose counts. F.II.) Example of infected PA showing greater mean size of callose counts. G.I.) Example of healthy SB showing less callose counts. G.II.) Example of infected SB showing bigger but transversally aggregated callose counts.  Yellow triangle depicts the mean. P-values in A, C, and D were obtained through Welche’s t-test. P-values in B and E were obtained through Wilcox’s test. Old leaves= 273 ± 30 days, medium leaves= 101.4 ± 22 days, and young leaves= 27.1 ± 9 days	59
Figure 2-7. Percentage of transversal plugging in bark peels phloem in Sugar Belle® mandarin (SB) and pineapple sweet orange (PA). Yellow triangle depicts the mean. P-values were obtained through Welche’s T-test.	60
Figure 2-8 Relative gene expression of callose synthase genes within leaves of the same age of healthy and infected pineapple sweet orange. P-values were obtained through Welche’s T-test.	61
Figure 2-9 A) Mean symptom severity score of infected Pineapple (PA) sweet orange and Sugar Belle® (SB) mandarin assessed by 15 evaluators. B)  Relative quantification of CLas genetic material of infected PA and SB. C) Relative gene expression of PLCPs and senesce related genes (CaAALP, CsRD19, and SRG1B) and defense (NPR1) genes in leaves of different ages of healthy and infected PA and SB. Grey lines between cultivars connects the mean values of the observations from the same evaluator. Yellow triangle depicts the mean. P-value in A was obtained through paired Welche’s t-test and B through a two tails Welche’s t-test. P-values in C were obtained through Wilcox’s test. Old leaves= 273 ± 30 days, medium leaves= 101.4 ± 22 days, and young leaves= 27.1 ± 9 days	62
Figure 2-10. Relative gene expression of PLCP and Senescence related gene 1 (SRG1) within leaves of the same age of healthy and pineapple sweet orange. P-values were obtained through Welche’s T-test.	63
Figure 2-11. Relative gene expression of PLCP and Senescence related gene 1 (SRG1) within leaves of the same age of healthy and infected Sugar Belle®. P-values were obtained through Welche’s T-test.	64
Figure 2-12  A.I) Petiole sections of healthy and infected Pineapple (PA) sweet orange and Sugar Belle® (SB) mandarin (scale bar= 200 µm). A.II) Area of vascular bundles of petioles of healthy and infected PA and SB. B.I) Leaf midrib sections of healthy and infected PA and SB (scale bar= 100 µm). B.II) Area of vascular bundles of midribs of healthy and infected PA and SB. C.I) Comparison of HLB affected and healthy PA exhibited an increase variance in the xylem vessel morphometrics and diseased and healthy SB evidencing maintenance of xylem vessel’s morphometrics;  C.II to C.IV) Anatomical metrics of xylem vessels. In  A.I and B.I red, magenta and yellow depict the area of pith, xylem, and phloem, respectively. In C.I Xv: xylem vessel, Cs: cambium strip, Phv: Phloem sieve element, Php: phloem parenchyma. P-values in A.II were obtained through Wilcox’s test. P-value in B.II, C.II, and C.III were obtained through two tails Welche’s t-test. Error bars indicate standard error.	66
Figure 2-13 A. Total area of petiole of healthy and infected PA and SB P-values were 60 obtained through Wilcox’s test. B) Comparison of the relative changes in petiole morphometrics 61 generated by HLB between the susceptible Pineapple (PA) sweet orange and the tolerant Sugar Belle® 62 (SB) mandarin through permutational test of means.	66
Figure 2-14. Model of the carbohydrate dynamics at the leaf level in the tolerant Sugar Belle® (SB) mandarin and the susceptible pineapple sweet orange (PA). The effect in the 14CO2 fixation and 14C-carbohydrate export rate in the infected plants are calculated based on obtained experimental output. Comparisons are carried out assuming that healthy SB and PA have the same behavior.	67
Figure 2-15 Model of callose accumulation in bark peel phloem in the tolerant Sugar Belle® (SB) mandarin and the susceptible pineapple sweet orange (PA). The hypothetical model was obtained selecting a possible outcome of a random uniform distribution that follows the experimentally obtained callose counts and mean distance to the closest neighbor.	68
Figure 3-116 Cumulative number of shoots from October 2021 to August 2022 of	87
Figure 3-217 Frequencies of shoot development over time in gibberellic acid treated and untreated pineapple sweet orange trees	88
Figure 3-318 Lengths and number of leaves of gibberellic acid treated and untreated pineapple sweet orange trees pineapple trees. Black triangles depict the average. Treatments were compared using a Welche’s T-test	89
Figure 3-419 Widths and stem surface area of gibberellic acid treated and untreated pineapple sweet orange trees pineapple trees. Black triangles depict the average. Treatments were compared using a Welche’s T-test	90
Figure 3-520Total foliar area, total number of leaves, and foliar area per leaf of gibberellic acid treated and untreated pineapple sweet orange trees. Red triangles depict the average. Treatments were compared using a Welche’s T-test	91
Figure 3-621 Overall starch content of gibberellic acid treated and untreated, and 2-DDG treated and untreated pineapple sweet orange trees. Red triangles depict the average. Treatments were compared using a Wilcox’s Test	92
Figure 3-722Starch content by leaf age of gibberellic acid treated and untreated, and 2-DDG treated and untreated pineapple sweet orange trees. Red triangles depict the average. Treatments were compared using a Wilcox’s Test	93
Figure 3-823Overall relative titer of CLas genetic material of gibberellic acid treated and untreated, and 2-DDG treated and untreated pineapple sweet orange trees. Red triangles depict the average. Treatments were compared using a Wilcox’s Test	94
Figure 3-924 relative titer of CLas genetic material by leaf age of gibberellic acid treated and untreated, and 2-DDG treated and untreated pineapple sweet orange trees. Red triangles depict the average. Treatments were compared using a Wilcox’s Test	96
Figure 3-1025Overall content of callose in leaf midribs of gibberellic acid treated and untreated, and 2-DDG treated and untreated pineapple sweet orange trees. Red triangles depict the average. Treatments were compared using a Wilcox’s Test	96
Figure 3-1126Overall content of callose in leaf midribs of gibberellic acid treated and untreated, and 2-DDG treated and untreated pineapple sweet orange trees. Red triangles depict the average. Treatments were compared using a Wilcox’s Test	97
Figure 3-12 27Linear regression between content of callose and starch content of of gibberellic acid treated and untreated, and 2-DDG treated and untreated pineapple sweet orange trees.	98














Abstract of Thesis Presented to the Graduate School
of the University of Florida in Partial Fulfillment of the
Requirements for the Degree of Master of Science

HLB-TOLERANCE MECHANISM: LESSONS LEARNED FROM THE SUGAR BELLE® MANDARIN AND NOVEL MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
By
Jacobo Robledo Buritica

August 2023

Chair: Amit Levy
Cochair: Chistopher Vincent 
Cochair:  Tripti Vashisth
Major: Plant Pathology

Huanglongbing (HLB), also known as citrus greening, is a devastating disease affecting citrus trees worldwide. This thesis aimed to explore the mechanisms underlying HLB-tolerance in citrus cultivars and investigate management strategies to mitigate the disease's impact. Contrasting comparisons were made between the HLB-tolerant Sugar Belle® mandarin and the susceptible pineapple sweet orange, revealing three hypothetical complementary mechanisms of tolerance in Sugar Belle. These mechanisms include an increase in CO2 fixation, mild reduction of carbohydrate export, and localized callose distribution. Activation of defense mechanisms through papain-like cysteine proteases (PLCPs) and increased xylem area further contribute to HLB tolerance.
Additionally, the effects of exogenous applications of gibberellic acid (GA) and the callose inhibitor 2-Deoxy-D-glucose (2-DDG) were investigated. GA application in the susceptible pineapple sweet orange resulted in enhanced vegetative growth and morphological changes, while 2-DDG showed potential in reducing callose accumulation. However, further research is needed to fully understand the implications of these management practices on HLB progression and severity.
The findings of this thesis emphasize the limitations of using symptom severity and relative CLas titer as indicators of HLB tolerance. Instead, a deeper understanding of physiological, pathological, and anatomical phenomena is required to unravel the complexities of HLB tolerance mechanisms. These findings contribute to the development of an integrated management approach that targets multiple mechanisms to minimize HLB's impact on susceptible cultivars until resistant materials become available. This work lays the foundation for future research on HLB tolerance and offers valuable insights for the citrus industry to combat this devastating disease.












CHAPTER 1
LITERATURE REVIEW
Citrus Greening or Huanglongbing: a devastating disease that threatens the citrus industry in the Americas
Huanglongbing (HLB) is one of the most limiting citrus diseases in the Americas and no cure has been developed. Widely speaking, this disease is putatively caused by three vector-borne alphaproteobacteria named Candidatus liberibacter asiaticus [CLas], Candidatus liberibacter americanus [CLam] and Candidatus liberibacter africanus [CLaf] that are restricted to the plant’s phloem (Bové, 2006; Duan et al., 2009; Lin et al., 2015; Thapa et al., 2020). CLas and CLam have been detected in the Americas while CLaf is restricted to the African continent and certain areas of Saudi Arabia and Yemen (EPPO, 2020). Although symptomatology caused by CLas and CLam is similar, recent studies in HLB endemic regions where both species are present indicate that CLas overcomes CLam populations over time suggesting a better fitness of CLas associated with its tolerance to high temperatures (Gasparoto et al., 2022; Lopes et al., 2009). In Florida, CLas is the sole species found and is believed to be exclusively responsible for the decline in citrus production in the sunshine state (A. Singerman & Futch, 2018). Therefore, despite the presence of two species in the Americas, CLas is considered the putative primary causal agent for the majority of HLB epidemics. As a result, this species remains the primary focus of this thesis.
CLas has a complex interaction with its vector host and causes distinctive symptoms in citrus trees that significantly reduce their yield. The Asian Citrus Psyllid (ACP), Diaphorina citri Kuwayama (Hemiptera: Liviidae), is the insect vector of CLas (Bové, 2006). Within the ACPs, Bacteria can live in a propagative and circulative manner allowing the pathogen to persist during most of the insect life cycle (Ammar et al., 2011; K. Liu et al., 2021; Orlovskis et al., 2015). When infected ACPs feed from citrus trees, CLas is injected into the phloem causing infection (Bové, 2006). Before symptoms are noticed, CLas colonizes and multiplies in the roots, generating considerable damage, to further invade leaves of young foliar flushes when they are still a sink (Johnson et al., 2014). After considerably long incubation periods, symptoms such as yellowing, blotchy mottling, stunted growth, twig dieback, premature fruit drop, misshapen fruit, and eventually citrus dead are developed (Aritua et al., 2013; da Graça et al., 2016; Tang & Vashisth, 2020). These symptoms, which result in reduced productivity, create the need for additional inputs to sustain infected citrus trees and maintain their health (Sheng Li et al., 2020). However, the requirement for these additional inputs, combined with the varying response of citrus trees to such interventions, has increased the risks associated with citrus investments. As a consequence, producers are less willing to invest in new plantings (Spreen et al., 2014). 
HLB has been confirmed in various countries in the Americas including the United States, Mexico, Belize, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, Costa Rica, Panama, Dominican Republic, Brazil, Colombia, Venezuela, Argentina, Bolivia, Chile, Ecuador, Paraguay, Peru, and Uruguay (EPPO, 2022). Among these countries, Brazil, Mexico, and the USA are the top three citrus producers in the region (Xinmiao et al., 2015). The citrus industry in these countries has been affected by HLB, although the impact has varied between nations. HLB disease was first confirmed in Brazil in 2004, in Florida - USA in 2005, and in Mexico in 2009 (Fruitnet, 2009; USDA, 2022). For instance, due to the Huanglongbing (HLB) disease, countries like Brazil have had to eradicate more than 18 million trees, with 5 to 15% of production costs dedicated to controlling ACPs (Pietersen et al., 2010); In Mexico, it is estimated that five years after the disease's establishment, nearly 2 million tons of oranges will have been lost, along with 13.7 million workdays and at least 26,311 direct jobs in the agro-industry (Salcedo et al., 2011); in the USA, between 2007 and 2018, was registered a 72.2% decrease in orange production, and the price has tripled (Dala-Paula et al., 2019; A. Singerman et al., 2017). In the iconic state of Florida - USA, the cost of maintaining orange plantations has increased by 33% to 300%, and farmers' uncertainty about starting new plantations is growing due to the risks involved (Sheng Li et al., 2020; Spreen et al., 2014). Additionally, the lifespan of the trees has dropped from 50 years to just 7 to 10 years (Spreen et al., 2014; Li et al., 2020). Similarly, but in opposites coasts, California predicts that losses for the next 20 years, assuming measures are taken to eradicate affected plants, will amount to $2.2 billion (Lopez & Durborow, 2014). Thus, while the citrus production schemes and markets in these countries may vary significantly, the impact of HLB on costs, yield, and reliability of the citrus industry represents not only a threat to the supply of citrus but also a serious economic concern for jobs and potential social difficulties in areas where citrus production is an important economic commodity.
HLB epidemies in the Americas have rapidly grown over time mainly due to the fast dispersal of the pathogen and wide susceptibility of commercial groves (Bové, 2006). The widespread distribution among citrus growing areas of the ACPs are generally associated with extensive occurrence of HLB in future scenarios (Curtolo et al., 2020; Graham et al., 2020; Wulff et al., 2020). Similarly, this disease can be spread by grafting budwoods from infected plants and through dodder plants (Gabriel et al., 2020; Hilf & Luo, 2020). After infection, plants have an incubation period of 1 to 2.5 years and once HLB symptoms are detected the pathogen has extensively colonized surrounding susceptible hosts (Gottwald, 2010). All citrus genotypes seem to be susceptible to this disease, but field experiments have demonstrated that the degree of severity is variable between cultivars or transgenic plants indicating a certain degree of tolerance or resistance, which is understood by the lack if detection of the bacterium for years or reduced fruit drop (Dutt et al., 2015; Ramadugu et al., 2016; Soares et al., 2022; Stover et al., 2016). In conclusion, understanding the factors that might influence HLB epidemics, such as tolerance to HLB and management strategies is crucial for developing citrus production systems that can thrive under HLB endemic conditions. This knowledge will aid in addressing the complex challenges posed by HLB outbreaks and emphasize the importance of research to devise more effective strategies for managing this disease while considering the variable severity that an HLB epidemic might represent under different management scenarios.
Managing HLB: Tackling an Incurable Disease with Incompletely Understood Vector-Host Interactions and Mechanisms
Management strategies for controlling Huanglongbing (HLB) in citrus have focused on various components necessary for disease development. Traditional and innovative approaches have been developed to create less favorable environments for the disease, enhance host resistance, and reduce pathogen transmission and acquisition. However, the complexity of the HLB pathosystems and gaps in our understanding of the disease have hindered the development of strategies to restore citrus productivity and quality to pre-HLB levels.
From an environmental perspective, several alternatives have been explored to exclude, prevent, or reduce Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus (CLas) infections in citrus plants and its vector. Notably, citrus production under screen, moderate shade to reduce light intensity, mulching, and cover crops have emerged as strategies with a primary focus on achieving this objective. The use of screens or nets as a direct measure to exclude the vector, Diaphorina citri, acts as a physical barrier that delays the progression and severity of HLB (Ferrarezi et al., 2019). On the other hand, modifying the environment through mulching, cover crops, and moderate shade conditions can potentially impact the population dynamics of Asian citrus psyllids (ACPs) and improve the photosystem-II performance of citrus (Croxton & Stansly, 2014; George et al., 2022; Suh et al., 2021; Vincent et al., 2021).
While these strategies hold promise for increasing citrus yields, their long-term effects and economic feasibility in commercial settings require further analysis. Comprehensive studies are needed to evaluate the suitability and cost-effectiveness of these strategies in commercial citrus groves.
Different strategies have been developed from the host perspective to enhance citrus resistance to HLB, develop immunity, and improve growing conditions. Certain citrus species and relatives, including Microcitrus australasica, Poncirus trifoliata, Balsamocitrus dawei, Bergera koenigii, Casimiroa edulis, Clausena excavata, Murraya paniculata, Citrus medica, Eremocitrus glauca, Citrus latipes, Carrizo citrange, Persian lime, and Eureka lemon, have shown tolerance or resistance to HLB (Bai et al., 2020; Gao et al., 2023; Sun et al., 2019; N. Wang, 2021). Additionally, improved hybrid materials with enhanced growth and superior yield under HLB endemic conditions, such as Sugar Belle, SunDragon, Gator Bites, Marathon, Bingo, FF-5-51-2, FF-1-85-109, and FF-1-85-124, have been demonstrated (Albrecht & Bowman, 2012; Bai et al., 2020; Bowman et al., 2021; Neff, 2022; Robinson, 2020; Stover et al., 2017). However, the mechanisms behind the tolerance or reduced susceptibility of these materials are not yet fully understood.
Over the years, resistant materials to key diseases such as HLB and citrus canker have been experimentally developed through Agrobacterium-mediated transformation. These approaches involve introducing exogenous genes, such as plant resistance genes, key positive regulators of SAR genes, antimicrobial peptide genes, plant metabolic genes, pathogenic genes, and kinase genes (Sun et al., 2019). However, important restrictions, including regulatory constraints, market limitations, and consumer concerns, have hindered the release and practical utilization of these transgenic plants. As a result, the latest approaches involve the use of CRISPR-mediated gene editing to introduce, delete, or replace specific DNA sequences in citrus genomes (Sun et al., 2019). In fact, CRISPR technology has already demonstrated success in producing highly resistant trees to citrus canker (Huang et al., 2022; Jia, Omar, et al., 2022; Jia, Wang, et al., 2022). However, the incomplete understanding of CLas pathogenicity and the hypothesis suggesting that CLas does not contain pathogenicity factors that directly cause HLB symptoms (Ma et al., 2022) have complicated the effective use of this technology in delivering a genetically engineered approach to overcome the disease.
In the absence of commercially available replacements of the same quality for susceptible cultivars, strategies aimed at improving the performance of HLB-infected trees have been explored. These measures aim to increase yields by addressing the deficits caused by the disease. One such strategy involves implementing enhanced nutrition programs, the application of plant growth regulators, and the use of callose inhibitors, which could prove to be effective in maintaining the profitability of susceptible cultivars.
Enhanced nutrition programs are based on the hypothesis that HLB causes deficiency symptoms of micronutrients in citrus trees, making it crucial to ensure optimal levels of these nutrients in the leaves. By maintaining appropriate levels of micronutrients like manganese and iron, citrus trees can carry out photosynthetic activities necessary for growth and development. However, this strategy requires nearly double the amount of fertilizers compared to pre-HLB treatments (da Silva et al., 2020; Kwakye & Kadyampakeni, 2022).	Similarly, the application of plant growth regulators, such as gibberellic acid (GA), has shown promise in reducing fruit drop in citrus (Albrigo & Stover, 2015; Ma et al., 2022; Singh et al., 2022; Tang et al., 2021). GA is known to slow down the fruit aging process, leading to reduced fruit drop and improved fruit quality (Ma et al., 2022). It also helps mitigate oxidative stress and enhances plant defense responses (Singh et al., 2022). However, the specific mechanisms through which GA applications improve HLB tolerance in citrus trees are not yet fully understood.
On the other hand, reducing the callose deposits that block the phloem of CLas-infected citrus trees is believed to enhance the translocation of sucrose (Welker et al., 2022). Therefore, the use of callose inhibitors is thought to counteract the negative effects of HLB (J. Li et al., 2016). It is worth noting, however, that callose also plays an important role in natural leaf abscission and other developmental stages, as well as in pathogen resistance, as observed in cases such as Alternaria brown spot disease (Jaffe & Goren, 1988; Llorens et al., 2013).
Despite the existence of strategies to increase yields in HLB-affected ans susceptible trees, the mechanisms behind their effectiveness remain largely unknown, and their practical implementation is still under development.
Finally, extensive efforts have been dedicated to reducing the inoculum of CLas in both the plant host and the insect vector (Filho et al., 2016). Targeting this aspect of the disease triangle shows promise for controlling HLB (Boina & Bloomquist, 2015; Sheng Li et al., 2020; Ariel Singerman & Rogers, 2020). However, the complex and unique interactions established by CLas with both organisms have presented challenges in developing effective strategies (Galdeano et al., 2020; B. Hu et al., 2021; Killiny, 2022). Successful cultivation of CLas has not been achieved, and its small genome suggests a potential reliance on close interactions with its hosts or their bacterial communities (Y. Li et al., 2023; Merfa et al., 2019). Furthermore, the bacterium's habitat within the plant, the vulnerability of phloem tissues, and the limited understanding of phloem behavior, development, and physiology within the scientific community are significant factors that hinder the development of more efficient strategies to reduce CLas inoculum or mitigate the detrimental effects it imposes on citrus trees.
To date, some of the alternatives to reducing bacterium inoculum entails antibiotic use (Hussain et al., 2019; M. Li & Nangong, 2021; Roldán et al., 2023), vector control (Boina & Bloomquist, 2015; Sheng Li et al., 2020; Ariel Singerman & Rogers, 2020), tree eradication (de Andrade et al., 2021), modification of vector microbial communities to suppress CLas (Y. Li et al., 2023; Munir et al., 2021), improved detection techniques (Braswell et al., 2020; Keremane et al., 2021; Rattner et al., 2022), and heat treatments (G. Fan et al., 2016; Yang et al., 2016). While these strategies have been carefully studied, there are notable gaps in our understanding. These gaps include the potential development of bacterial resistance, a lack of comprehensive knowledge regarding the epidemiological characteristics of the disease, uncertainties regarding the impact of microbial communities and plant host endophytes on CLas development, and limited information on the actual distribution and colonization of the bacterium within citrus hosts. These limitations hinder the rapid development of effective strategies to reduce the pathogen population. Nevertheless, the pursuit of a solution from this perspective is still actively being studied and researched.
This thesis explores three management strategies to control HLB, aiming to gain insights into the mechanisms involved in HLB management. Firstly, we compared the tolerant cultivar Sugar Belle® to the susceptible pineapple sweet orange to understand how physiological, pathological, and anatomical modifications contribute to HLB tolerance. Secondly, we examined the effects of the plant growth regulator gibberellic acid on susceptible plants to identify its impact on bacterial titer and plant growth. Finally, we utilized a callose inhibitor on susceptible oranges to investigate if its application alters the overall production of callose, a deleterious abnormality induced by HLB that restricts carbohydrate translocation in the phloem. By understanding the mechanisms involved in these three management practices, we can identify key factors that contribute to HLB tolerance from different perspectives, which may facilitate the integration and development of future management strategies to sustain the citrus industry in the absence of resistant materials.
 
CHAPTER 2
THE SUGAR BELLE MANDARIN MAY EXHIBIT GREATER TOLERANCE TO HLB THROUGH MILD DECREASE IN CARBOHYDRATE EXPORT BUT BOOST IN CO2 FIXATOIN, ENHANCED EXPRESSION OF PLANT DEFENSE ACTIVATORS, AND INCREASE INVESTMENT IN XYLEM VESSELS
Introduction 
In the absence of commercially viable HLB-resistant cultivars, tolerant citrus materials offer a notable alternative to mitigate the impacts of HLB (Albrecht & Bowman, 2012; Bai et al., 2020; Bowman et al., 2021; Neff, 2022; Robinson, 2020; Stover et al., 2017). One prominent HLB-tolerant citrus cultivar is Sugar Belle®, a mandarin hybrid that shares characteristics with the Minneola tangelo, including its distinctive bell shape. Sugar Belle® is known for its low seed count, easy peeling, high juiciness, and rich red-orange color color (Deng et al., 2019; Dou & Gmitter, 2007). Long-term field trials with this cultivar have demonstrated reduced fruit drop and enhanced growth under HLB-endemic conditions allowing sugar Belle® to obtain a tolerant label (Stover et al., 2016). 
The tolerant Sugar Belle® was developed in 2009 by Dr. Fred Gmitter and Dr. Jude Grosser at the UF/IFAS Citrus Research and Education Center in Lake Alfred, Florida (University of Florida, 2021). It is a "hybrid of a hybrid" mandarin resulting from the crossing of Clementine (Citrus clementine) and Minneola tangelo (Citrus x tangelo), the latter being a hybrid of Dancy tangerine [Citrus tangerine] and Duncan Sweet grapefruit [Citrus paradise] (Ask The Green Genie, n.d.; Killiny et al., 2017). While the parent varieties are susceptible to HLB (Folimonova et al., 2009; McCollum et al., 2016), metabolic and anatomical studies have suggested mechanisms that contribute to its tolerance, explaining its favorable field response in high-pressure HLB areas  (Deng et al., 2019; Jones & Killiny, 2021; Killiny et al., 2017; Ramadugu et al., 2016; Tang & Vashisth, 2020). However, practical limitations have hindered the widespread adoption of Sugar Belle in Florida's citrus industry. For example, the state's industry primarily focuses on orange production for the juice market, and over time, the size of Sugar Belle® fruits decreases, while the peeling process becomes more challenging. Additionally, the severity of HLB in Sugar Belle increases over time (John Chater and Fred Gmitter, personal communication, March 24, 2023). Despite these practical limitations, this cultivar remains an invaluable resource for understanding the mechanisms of tolerance in citrus trees. The knowledge gained from studying Sugar Belle® might contribute to the identification or development of new commercial cultivars better suited for the Florida citrus industry.
Although the mechanism behind the Sugar Belle® mandarin's tolerance to HLB is not fully comprehended, significant progress has been made towards understanding the basis for its reduced fruit drop. Researchers have gathered evidence to suggest that Sugar Belle® can enhance both plant growth and defense simultaneously, induce protection against pathogenic attacks, and mitigate oxidative stress induced by CLas (Deng et al., 2019, 2021; Killiny et al., 2017, 2018; Ribeiro et al., 2023; Tang & Vashisth, 2020). These mechanisms have been identified through anatomical, transcriptomic, and metabolomic studies. Enhanced growth and induction of the plant's defense system have been linked to an increased abundance of several amino acids, sugars, sugar alcohols, and antimicrobial phenolic compounds such as benzoic, ferulic, and caffeic acids, as well as significant alterations in the terpenoid biosynthetic pathway, green leaf volatile, thymol metabolic pathways, and phloem regeneration (Deng et al., 2019, 2021; Killiny et al., 2017, 2018). In contrast, the reduced fruit drop observed in this cultivar may be due to its advanced antioxidant system, as evidenced by its relatively mild increase in senescence and cell death genes when compared to susceptible Hamlin sweet orange (Tang & Vashisth, 2020). However, since HLB tolerance appears to be a complex phenomenon influenced by multiple layers of interactions, novel studies are needed to understand the physiological, pathological, and anatomical features of Sugar Belle's HLB-tolerance helping in unraveling its mechanisms.
Recent studies have provided evidence suggesting that HLB is an immune-mediated disease that triggers systemic and chronic immune responses in phloem tissue, including callose deposition, reactive oxygen species (ROS) production (such as H2O2), and induction of immunity-related genes (Ma et al., 2022). In addition to phloem regeneration, the tolerance of Sugar Belle® has been associated with an enhanced antioxidant process and higher concentrations of maltose and sucrose, which are known to scavenge ROS (Ribeiro et al., 2023; Tang & Vashisth, 2020). However, the response of sucrose translocation speeds may vary among tolerant rootstocks, and there is a negative correlation between callose accumulation and translocation speeds (Welker et al., 2021). Therefore, we hypothesize that the reported greater abundance of sugars in Sugar Belle® may be linked to a differential response in carbohydrate dynamics at the leaf level. However, there are significant knowledge gaps concerning the anatomical and physiological adaptations related to this increased abundance of sugars in this tolerant mandarin, as well as the behavioral response in terms of callose accumulation in the phloem of Sugar Belle®. Addressing these gaps is crucial for understanding how this cultivar achieves advanced antioxidant behavior and elucidating the underlying mechanisms related to carbohydrate dynamics. Based on the existing literature, this chapter explores hypotheses related to potential differential behavior in carbohydrate dynamics in Sugar Belle, the responses of callose deposition in the phloem of this cultivar, and the anatomical basis for the increased abundance of sugars linked to an enhanced investment in xylem development.
The aim of this chapter was to identify and quantify some of the mechanisms underlying the HLB-tolerance of SB focusing in three important aspects: a) carbohydrate dynamics at the leaf level, b) bacterial titer and expression of defense response genes, and c) anatomical responses and adaptations specifically related to callose accumulation in the phloem and xylem morphometrics. We achieved this by standardizing the impairments induced by HLB in SB through a direct comparison of healthy and infected plants. Then, the relative changes in the tolerant cultivar were compared to the changes observed in the susceptible pineapple (PA) sweet orange. We addressed three questions regarding physiological, pathological, and anatomical phenomena, respectively: i) How can the HLB tolerance of SB be explained based on carbohydrate and callose dynamics? ii) How are some components of the defense response (PLCPs and NPR1) involved in the tolerance of this mandarin? iii) Besides the well documented phloem regeneration, what quantitative anatomical adaptations are induced in the tolerant material?
Materials and Methods
Plant materials and growth conditions
In this experiment, a completely randomized design was employed. Budwood samples were collected from both healthy and CLas-infected trees of PA (Citrus sinensis) and SB (Citrus reticulata) in January 2021. These budwood samples were then grafted onto Volkamer lemon (Citrus volkameriana). The grafted plants were kept in an air-conditioned greenhouse at a temperature of 27°C, following the natural day/night cycle. The greenhouse was located at the Citrus Research and Education Center (CREC) in Lake Alfred, FL. The presence of CLas infection was confirmed in plants obtained from diseased PA and SB using qPCR. To minimize the potential impact of leaf age on carbohydrate export, the trees were pruned in September 2021. Each week, new shoots that were at least 5 centimeters long were labeled to track their age. For this study, five plants were selected from each combination, which included PA-healthy, PA-HLB+, SB-healthy, and SB-HLB+ combinations.
14C fixation and export assay
In October 2021, the selected plants were moved to a greenhouse equipped for radioisotope experiments. The process involved assessing the fixation of 14CO2 and the export of 14C-sugar, following the protocols recommended by Vincent et al., 2019 using a previously described experimental setup (Sheng‐yang Li & Vincent, 2022; Welker et al., 2021). The procedure entailed selecting the second or third oldest leaf from 8- to 10-week-old shoots of both healthy and infected PA and SB trees. The selected leaf was placed in a hermetic chamber with 90% light transmission and connected to a closed airflow system powered by an air pump. To generate 14CO2, 150 μl of 1 M citric acid was mixed with 100 μl of liquid sodium 14C-bicarbonate (0.1 mCi). The leaves were incubated for 30 minutes, after which the air in the system was vented for one hour. Subsequently, a circular sample approximately 7 mm in diameter was collected from the leaf and placed in 25 mL of commercial liquid scintillation cocktail (ScintiVerse, Fisher Scientific). Another sample from the same leaf was collected following the same procedure after 24 hours. The samples were incubated in the cocktail solution for three days, and the levels of radioactivity were measured using a liquid scintillation counter (Beckman LS-65000, Beckman Instruments, Fullerton, CA). The percentage of 14C-carbohydrate export in the leaf was calculated using Equation 1, where the total 14C signal immediately after labeling represented carbon fixation. Each day, one plant from each combination (PA-healthy, PA-HLB+, SB-healthy, and SB-HLB+) was labeled, and this process was repeated consecutively for five days. The experiment was replicated twice at different times (December 2022 and May 2023). To facilitate comparisons between replicates conducted on different dates and mitigate the influence of confounding factors on absolute values, the data were analyzed as fold-changes, comparing the infected and healthy trees within the same cultivar on the same experimental day.
Equation 1:
(_^14)LCE=  (c_1- c_24)/c_1   ×100
14LCE = leaf 14C-carbohydrate export (%)
C1 = radioactivity of the leaf disk 1 h after the 14CO2 inoculation  
C24 = radioactivity of the leaf disk 24 h after the 14CO2 inoculation  
Quantification of starch
The starch content of the subsequent leaf following the 14C-labeled leaf was evaluated. Five plants from each combination (PA-healthy, PA-HLB+, SB-healthy, and SB-HLB+) were included in the assessment, with one leaf analyzed per plant. The experiment was conducted on two separate occasions. To assess the starch content, three leaf punches, approximately 7 mm in diameter, were taken and placed in reinforced tubes with 500 μL of distilled water and five metallic beads measuring 2.8 mm in diameter. The samples were homogenized for three minutes at 6,500 RPM using a Precellys 24 tissue homogenizer. Following homogenization, the mixture was boiled for 10 minutes, vortexed, and centrifuged for 2 minutes at 2,500 RPM. Subsequently, 300 μL of the supernatant were transferred to clean 2 mL tubes, and 900 μL of 200-proof ethanol were added. The mixture was vortexed, centrifuged for 10 minutes at 14,000 RPM, and the supernatant was discarded. The resulting pellet was homogenized in 1 mL of deionized water. Finally, 50 μL of the mixture, 50 μL of iodine solution (consisting of 2% [w/v] Potassium Iodide and 0.2% [w/v] Iodine), and 200 μL of deionized water were added to individual wells of a 96-well microplate. The absorbance at 595 nm was measured using a SpectraMax 250 microplate reader (Molecular Devices). Each microplate included starch rice standards at various dilution factors. Linear functions based on the standard curve of concentrations were generated to determine the starch concentration in the samples (Keeley et al., 2022). The final starch content value for each sample was calculated as the average of three technical replicates.
Callose quantification in the phloem 
Three bark peels were collected from shoots aged 8 to 11 weeks, with three trees representing each combination (PA-healthy, PA-HLB+, SB-healthy, and SB-HLB+). Using a scalpel, sections measuring 0.5 to 1 cm wide and 2 to 3 cm in length were peeled away and immediately placed in 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes containing 85% ice-cold ethanol. The tissues were then destained in the ethanol solution overnight at room temperature and rehydrated in 0.01% Tween-20 for 1 hour. Subsequently, the peels were stained with aniline blue using a protocol previously described (Levy et al., 2007), which involved aniline blue solution (0.6 M glycine, 0.01% [w/v] aniline blue at pH 9.5 adjusted with KOH). The tissues were observed using a Leica SP8 confocal microscope equipped with a 10×/0.32 NA objective. A pinhole diameter of 330.5 µm was set, a 405 nm diode laser at 25% power was used for excitation, and emission detection was done with a 475–525 nm band-pass filter, with gain at 400.9 and offset at −0.09. Three images of the phloem in each peel sample were captured. Preprocessing of each image involved applying a mean filter with a radius of three pixels using FIJI software (Schindelin et al., 2012). The number of callose deposits per frame, their mean size, area, and pixel coordinates were quantified using a supervised machine learning method developed with Ilastik(Berg et al., 2019; Welker & Levy, 2022). The distances between each callose deposit and its nearest neighbor were calculated using the Spatstat package [v 3.0.2] (Baddeley et al., 2015) in R [v4.2.1] (R Core Team, 2022). The object classification obtained from Ilastik was manually rotated to ensure the phloem vessels were oriented at a 90° angle. The resulting images were saved as text images, and the number of X-axis pixels containing at least one pixel classified as callose by any Y pixel was counted. The percentage of transverse plugging was calculated using this value and the total number of X pixels in each image. Figure 2-1 provides a detailed scheme of the methodology employed for measuring phloem transversal plugging in the collected bark peels.
Relative gene expression:
To determine the relative expression of specific genes, five callose synthase, three glucanase, one Ferredoxin-NADP reductase, three defense response genes, and one senescence-related gene were selected (Table 2-1). For the analysis, old (273 ± 30 days), medium (101.4 ± 22 days), and young (27.1 ± 9 days) leaves were collected from three trees representing each combination (PA-healthy, PA-HLB+, SB-healthy, and SB-HLB+). The leaf samples were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and then pulverized. From the ground tissue, 100 mg was taken, and total RNA was extracted using Trizol reagent (Invitrogen), followed by DNase I treatment (Life Technologies) to eliminate DNA contaminants. Complementary DNA (cDNA) was synthesized using the High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (Applied Biosystems) as per the manufacturer's instructions. Reverse Transcription Quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) was performed using the PowerUp SYBR Green Master Mix (Applied Biosystems). The cDNA was diluted to 3.3 ng/µL, and a reaction mixture of 10 µL was prepared, containing 5 µL PowerUp SYBR Green Master Mix, 0.5 µL of each forward and reverse primer (10 mM; see Table 2-1), and 1.33 µL of cDNA. Each sample was analyzed with three technical replicates. Thermocycling was conducted using the model 7500 Fast Real-Time PCR system (Applied Biosystems), with the following settings: 50°C for 2 minutes, 95°C for 2 minutes, and 40 cycles alternating between 95°C for 35 seconds and 60°C for 30 seconds, followed by a dissociation step at the end. The relative gene expression was calculated using GAPDH as the reference gene and the 2-ΔΔCt method (Livak & Schmittgen, 2001). The control group for each gene and cultivar was determined using the arithmetic mean of ΔCt values from healthy plants.
Assessment of symptom severity
To evaluate the severity of HLB symptoms in infected PA and SB trees, a group of 15 knowledgeable evaluators from the Citrus Research Education Center (CREC) participated in the assessment. Five trees per cultivar were included in the evaluation. To ensure unbiased evaluation, all trees were randomly assigned to two separate benches, and their original identification tags were replaced with common names traditionally associated with both men and women in equal proportions. The evaluators used a scoring scale developed in previous studies (Robertson et al., 2018) to assess the severity of symptoms. The scoring scale consisted of four categories: Score 0 indicating no symptoms, Score 1 representing very mild symptoms on some leaves, Score 2 indicating clear symptoms on most leaves, and Score 3 representing severe symptoms on most leaves. A visual representation of the severity scale was provided to the evaluators as a reference while recording their scores. During the assessment, the evaluators did not have direct contact with each other to avoid any influence on their scoring. Subsequently, the mean severity score was calculated for each evaluator, separately for each cultivar. To analyze the likelihood of obtaining higher scores from the same evaluators for one cultivar compared to the other, a paired Welch's T-test was conducted.
Total nucleic acid extraction
Tender leaves with fully expanded midribs were selected for analysis. Sections of the midrib were chopped, and samples weighing 100 mg were freeze-ground in a Qiagen® TissueLyser II. The grinding process was performed for 30 seconds at a rate of 30 beats per second, using two 5 mm diameter metal beads. This cycle was repeated until the tissues reached a powdery consistency. The resulting powder was then homogenized with 1 mL of CTAB solution, which consisted of 10% (v/v) 1M Tris pH 8, 8.2% (w/v) NaCl, 10% (v/v) 0.5 EDTA pH 8, 2.5% (w/v) CTAB, and 1% (w/v) PVP-40. The mixture was incubated in a water bath at 65℃ for 30 minutes. Next, 500 μL of a 24:1 chloroform:amyl alcohol solution was added, and the mixture was vortexed for 5 seconds. The samples were then centrifuged at 13,000 RPM for 1 minute, and the top layer was carefully transferred to a new 1.5 mL Eppendorf tube. Approximately the same volume (~400 μL) of -20℃ isopropyl alcohol was added, and the mixture was incubated at -20℃ for 15 minutes. After incubation, the samples were centrifuged at 15,000 RPM for 5 minutes. The supernatant was discarded, and the resulting pellet was washed with 75% ethanol. The pellet was again centrifuged at 15,000 RPM for 5 minutes, and the ethanol was removed. The remaining liquid was carefully extracted using a P-100 pipette. Finally, the samples were air-dried in a laminar flow hood for 5 minutes, and the extracted DNA was reconstituted in 50 μL of DNAase-free water. The quality and concentration of the DNA were determined using a BioDrop µLITE spectrophotometer. All the samples were adjusted to a standardized concentration of 100 ng/μL.
Relative quantification of CLas genetic material by q-PCR
CLas genetic material was quantified in the same leaves that were utilized for the starch quantification. To determine the relative quantification of CLas in leaf midrib we targeted the genomic region of the rplJ/rplL ribosomal protein with the CQULA primer set [CQULA04F= 5′-TGAATTCTTCGAGGTTGGTGAGC-3′, CQULA04R= 5′-AGAATTCGACTTAATCCCCACCT-3′,  and TaqMan probe CQULAP10= 5′-ATCGTCTCGTCAAGATTGCTATCCGTGATACTAG-3′] (Z. Wang et al., 2006). Briefly, for each sample 25 µL of reaction mixture containing 1x TaqMan™ Fast Universal PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems), 0.8 µM of each primer, 0.2 µM of TaqMan probe, and 100 ng of DNA was used. The reaction was carried out in an Applied Biosystems™ 7500 Real-Time PCR System following the next conditions: 50°C for 2 min, 95°C for 10 min, 40 cycles at 95°C for 15 seconds, and 64°C for 45 seconds. A manual threshold of 0.2 was set to record the Ct values. The final Ct value of every sample was the average of the Ct values of two technical replicates. To facilitate the interpretation of the results, the relative quantification of CLas genetic material was expressed as ∆Ct (the difference between the Ct of the no-template samples and the Ct of the experiment samples). Thus, greater ∆Ct values depict a higher amount of CLas DNA.
Quantification of anatomical variables
An examination of the leaf petioles and midribs was carried out to analyze the anatomy. Five different trees were selected for each of the four treatment combinations (PA-healthy, PA-HLB+, SB-healthy, and SB-HLB+), resulting in a total of five samples per treatment (replicates).
For the petioles, a histological analysis was performed following the method described previously (Wolberg et al., 2023). The samples were fixed in FAA solution (formalin: acetic acid: ethanol 70% 1:1:18), embedded in paraffin wax (Leica), and sectioned using a rotary automatic microtome (CUT 6062, SLEE medical GmbH, Germany) at a thickness of 12 μm. The sections were stained with Safranin-Alcian Blue.
Regarding the midribs, three samples were taken from the proximal, medial, and distal areas of the leaves. Midribs measuring 5 mm in length were dissected and fixed for 4 hours at room temperature in 3% (v/v) glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7.2). The tissues were washed in phosphate buffer, postfixed for 4 hours at room temperature in 2% osmium tetroxide (w/v) in potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7.2), and then washed again in phosphate buffer. Dehydration was carried out using a 10% acetone (v/v) series (10 minutes per step), followed by infiltration and embedding in Spurr's resin over a period of 3 days (Achor et al., 2020). From the resin-embedded ribbons, 1 μm thick sections were cut and placed on microscope slides in a drop of water. The slides were heated on a hot plate at 37°C overnight to ensure tissue adhesion. Subsequently, the slides were stained and counterstained for 30 seconds with methylene blue/azure A and basic fuchsin, respectively (Humphrey & Pittman, 1974).
Images of the samples were captured using an OMAX 14.0MP CCD digital camera mounted on an Olympus BX61 epifluorescence microscope (Olympus Inc., Tokyo, Japan). For both petioles and leaf midrib sections, the areas of the pith, xylem, and phloem (excluding phloem fibers) were manually delineated using the pencil tool in FIJI (Schindelin et al., 2012), represented by red, magenta, and yellow colors, respectively. The areas were measured in FIJI by selecting the color shapes through a color threshold macro in batch mode. These selections were saved as regions of interest (ROI) and loaded into an 8-bit transformed image. The number of cells and the average area of the xylem vessel lumen were measured. The threshold tool in FIJI was used to quantify the lumen area in the excluded area between the regions of interest ([xylem+pith] - pith). A size threshold of 8 μm2 was applied to distinguish parenchyma and fiber cells from xylem vessels. Counts above this threshold were considered as xylem vessels. A detailed workflow for measuring the morphometric variables of xylem vessels is provided in Figure 2-2. All macros and threshold settings are available in the following repository: https://github.com/jrobledob/Rep_code_Tolerance_of_Sugar_Belle
Statistical analysis
The study was conducted using a completely randomized design, and statistical analysis was performed using R [v3.02] (R Core Team, 2022). Two separate analyses were carried out to address the following objectives: i) assess the impact of HLB on healthy and infected plants within the same cultivar, and ii) compare the relative changes in tolerant and susceptible cultivars due to HLB.
In the first analysis, normality of the data was evaluated using the Shapiro-Wilk test. For variables that exhibited a normal distribution, a two-tailed Welch's T-test was employed to compare means, assuming unequal variances. For variables that did not follow a normal distribution, the non-parametric Wilcox's test was used to compare medians. The resulting P values from the statistical tests were automatically incorporated into the figures using the ggpubr package [v0.4.0] (Kassambara, 2020).
In the second analysis, the fold-change of each variable was calculated, representing the ratio of values in infected plants to values in healthy plants. This approach allowed for a relative comparison of the effects of HLB in both cultivars, accounting for the potential influence of the different citrus species on the absolute estimates of the variables. To test the hypothesis that the fold changes of PA and SB had identical distributions, a permutation test was conducted following the steps previously outlined (Wilcox, 2011).
The complete raw data and the fully reproducible code for the analyses can be accessed in the following repository: https://github.com/jrobledob/Rep_code_Tolerance_of_Sugar_Belle.
Results
The HLB-tolerant cultivar exhibits enhanced 14CO2 fixation and mitigates the reduction in 14C-carbohydrate export.
To compare the differences in 14CO2 fixation and 14C-carbohydrate export between infected and healthy plants within each cultivar, the fold-changes of these variables were calculated. The mean standardized results of each cultivar per day were compared to μ=0, which represents the expected value when the variables of infected and healthy plants are identical. In infected PA plants, a 30% downregulation of 14CO2 fixation was observed, whereas diseased SB plants showed a 2.5-fold upregulation of this variable. The mean log2 fold-change in 14CO2 fixation for PA was significantly smaller than 0 (P=0.01), while for SB, this value could be greater than 0 (P=0.06) (Figure 1A). Furthermore, the relative expression of Ferredoxin-NADP reductase (Cs1g25510), a gene involved in CO2 fixation during photosynthesis, was upregulated 2.9-fold in leaves of different ages in diseased SB (Figure 2-3B). When analyzing the relative gene expression of this gene by leaf age, a significant difference between means was primarily observed in young leaves (Figure 2-4). The observed difference in fold-changes between SB and PA for 14CO2 fixation and Ferredoxin-NADP reductase expression was significant at P=0.01 and P=0.02, respectively, indicating contrasting behavior between the two cultivars (Figure 2-5).
A downregulation of 13% and 38% in 14C-carbohydrate export was observed in infected SB and PA trees, respectively (Figure 2-3C). In both cultivars, the log2 mean fold-change in 14C-carbohydrate export was smaller than 0 (P<0.001 for PA and P=0.01 for SB). Additionally, the estimated difference in fold-changes in 14C-carbohydrate export between SB and PA was significant at P=0.01 (Figure 2-5). These results indicate that the downregulation of 14C-carbohydrate export in PA is considerably greater than in SB.
Due to the observed imbalances in 14CO2 fixation and 14C-carbohydrate export, carbohydrate accumulation in the leaves was expected. Thus, the starch content in the leaves was measured. In PA, the mean starch content of healthy plants was 8.6% greater than that of infected trees. Conversely, a sharp 2.6-fold increase in starch content was observed in infected SB plants compared to healthy trees (Figure 2-3D). The mean starch content between healthy and infected PA trees was similar (P=0.42), but the averages obtained in SB were significantly different at P<0.001 (Figure 2-3D). Additionally, the observed difference in fold-changes in starch content between the two cultivars suggests a clear distinction at P<0.001, with infected SB showing a relative increase in starch content and infected PA displaying a relative decrease (Figure 2-5).
Prevalence of Aggregated Callose Deposits in the Tolerant Cultivar
We examined the role of callose in healthy and infected trees of each cultivar, focusing on the number, size, area, percentage of transversal plugging, and mean distance to the closest neighbor of callose deposits. Healthy PA trees had 61% more callose deposits compared to infected PA, while healthy SB trees had 68% fewer callose deposits than SB trees affected by HLB (Figure 2-6A). Additionally, infected plants of both cultivars exhibited significantly larger mean sizes of callose deposits (Figure 2-6B). Although healthy PA had a 29% larger mean area of callose deposits than infected PA, the evidence for a significant difference was not strong (P=0.07). Infected SB trees had a 97% higher mean area of callose deposits than disease-free SB trees (P<0.01; Figure 2-6C). The mean distance to the closest neighbor of callose deposits was 36% smaller in infected SB trees compared to healthy SB trees, while the opposite trend was observed in PA with a 33% larger distance (Figure 2-6D). A significant difference in transversal phloem plugging was observed in the tolerant cultivar (P=0.02), but not in the susceptible cultivar (P=0.71) [Figure 2-7]. The percentage of transversal phloem plugging was 18% in healthy SB trees and 28% in HLB-affected SB trees. In PA, infected trees exhibited a transversal phloem plugging of 42%, while healthy trees had 41% (Figure 2-7).
To further analyze the variations in callose deposition between infected and healthy plants, we expressed them as fold changes for each cultivar. The differences in fold changes between SB and PA indicated significant alterations in callose accumulation induced by HLB in both susceptible and tolerant plants, with a maximum P value of 0.01 (Figure 2-5). PA showed downregulation in callose deposits and area, while SB exhibited upregulation in the number, size, and area of callose deposits. Notably, the tolerant cultivar displayed downregulation in the distance to the closest neighbor of callose deposits, suggesting a more aggregated or sectorized distribution of this polysaccharide in the phloem of the bark peels (Figure 2-6F and G).
We then explored the molecular dynamics underlying the observed changes in callose deposits by examining the relative expression of five callose synthase genes (CsCal3, CsCAL7, CsCAL9, CsCAL11, CsCAL12) and three glucanase genes (GHf17 [orange1.1g015273], CsBP, and Csßg1) in leaves of different ages in PA and SB. In infected PA plants, CsCAL7, CsCAL9, CsCAL11, and CsCAL12 were downregulated, while CsCal3 was upregulated, with significant differences observed for CsCAL7, CsCAL9, and CsCAL12. In contrast, all five callose synthase genes were upregulated in HLB-affected SB, with significant differences observed for CsCAL7, CsCAL9, CsCAL11, and CsCAL12 (Figure 2-6E and Figure 2-8). Our findings validate the pronounced contrast between cultivars, as evidenced by the divergent behavior of CsCAL7, CsCAL9, CsCAL11, and CsCAL12 in PA and SB, as well as the distinct upregulation of CsCal3 in tolerant and susceptible cultivars (Figure 2-5). Interestingly, constant upregulation of callose synthase genes was observed in cultivars with higher levels of callose deposition. However, the relative expression of the three glucanase genes did not exhibit contrasting behavior between healthy and infected plants in each cultivar or between the two cultivars (P min= 0.16) (Figure 2-6E and Figure 2-5). Hence, the contribution of callose synthase genes to callose accumulation was consistent in both cultivars, whereas glucanase expression was not associated with diseased plants or a specific cultivar (Figure 2-5).
Upregulation of defense response activators in the tolerant cultivar does not correspond to reduced symptoms or CLas relative titer
We conducted a comprehensive investigation into the dynamics of CLas genetic material, HLB symptom severity, and the expression of senescence and defense genes known to be influenced by CLas infection. To assess symptom severity, a panel of knowledgeable evaluators used a grading scale to score the plants. Our findings revealed that 14 out of 15 evaluators reported higher average severity scores for the SB mandarin. These observations were further supported by significant differences at P<0.01, indicating that the evaluators consistently observed more severe symptoms in the tolerant cultivar (Figure 2-9A).
We also examined the CLas genetic material and the relative expression of several genes, including SRG1B, CaAALP, CsRD19, and CsNPR1. Our analysis consistently showed lower relative CLas genetic material in the susceptible PA, as evidenced by a lower ∆Ct (Figure 2-9B). Additionally, we observed downregulation of CaAALP, CsRD19, and SRG1B in PA, while these genes were upregulated in SB (Figure 2-9C). The differences in fold changes were more pronounced in the susceptible cultivar, particularly in young leaves (Figures 2-10 and 2-11). These findings highlight a clear contrast in the fold-change patterns between SB and PA (Figure 2-5). Taken together, our results strongly suggest that the downregulation of CaAALP, CsRD19, and SRG1B in PA is a distinct characteristic that sets it apart from the tolerant cultivar.
Lastly, we observed a greater relative expression of CsNPR1 in healthy plants of both cultivars (Figure 2-9C). Notably, the differential expression of CsNPR1 between SB and PA was likely similar (P=0.71; Figure 2-5).
The tolerant cultivar can be distinguished by an increase in the relative xylem area and the preservation of xylem vessel metrics
Consistent changes were observed in the anatomical structure of petioles and leaf midribs in both healthy and infected trees. However, notable differences were observed between susceptible and tolerant cultivars. In HLB-affected PA trees, the total area of pith, xylem, and phloem in leaf midribs was significantly greater, ranging from 2 to 3-fold, compared to healthy trees (Figure 2-12). Although not statistically significant at a P-value of 0.05, a similar trend was observed in the petioles of HLB-affected PA trees, with fold changes ranging from 1.2 to 2.7 for pith, xylem, and phloem area (Figure 2-12A). Similarly, the leaf midrib pith and xylem total area of HLB-affected SB trees were 30% larger than those of healthy plants, although not reaching significance (Figure 2-12B). However, the pith and xylem total area of petioles in HLB-affected SB trees were significantly larger, ranging from 1.7 to 2.5-fold, compared to disease-free SB trees (Figure 2-12B). In contrast, the phloem total area of healthy SB trees was 25% larger in leaf midribs and 7% larger in petioles compared to diseased SB trees (Figure 2-12A and 2-12B). Furthermore, regardless of the cultivar, trees affected by HLB exhibited a larger petiole transversal area, although significant differences at a P-value of 0.05 were only observed in SB (Figure 2-13A).
To assess the relative impact of these anatomical changes, the proportional xylem area (compared to the total organ size) was calculated for both petioles and leaf midribs. The absence of significant differences in the proportional xylem area between healthy and infected PA trees in both tissues suggests that this variable is likely similar (P= 0.7; Figure 2-12A and B). In contrast, the xylem proportional area in infected SB trees was greater than that in healthy trees for both leaf midribs and petioles (although not statistically significant at a P-value of 0.05 for the latter), indicating that the disease-induced anatomical modifications positively influence the relative xylem area, particularly in midribs (P< 0.001; Figure 2-12B). In both cultivars and in the evaluated tissues, there was a significant reduction in the proportional phloem area at a minimum P-value of 0.05 (Figure 2-12A and B).
When comparing the fold changes of anatomical variables in midribs between SB and PA, significant differences were observed in the total area of pith, xylem, and phloem, as well as the proportional area of xylem. However, no significant difference was found in the proportional phloem area, which is likely similar in both cultivars (P= 0.57) (Figure 2-5). Our findings suggest that the most prominent anatomical modification in the tolerant SB cultivar is the relative increase in the proportional xylem area, resulting from slight growth in the total area of both xylem and pith, but a notable reduction in the total area of phloem (Figure 2-5). Although the comparison of fold changes in petioles did not yield statistically significant differences at a P-value of 0.05, the observed trends were nearly identical to those obtained in midribs (Figure 2-13B).
To investigate the underlying mechanisms behind the observed increase in 14CO2 fixation in CLas-tolerant SB plants, we examined the morphometric characteristics of xylem vessels in both susceptible and tolerant cultivars, aiming to identify potential differential adaptations. Our findings revealed that HLB-affected PA plants exhibited a 2.4-fold increase in the number of xylem vessels (P<0.01), whereas infected SB plants showed a slight reduction of 6% in this variable (Figure 2-12C I. and II.). However, this difference was not statistically significant (P=0.37) and was largely attributed to the stochastic nature of this variable. Moreover, although both infected PA and SB plants showed a slight increase in the average area of xylem vessel lumens (14% and 16% respectively), significant differences at P=0.01 were only observed between healthy and infected SB plants (Figure 2-12C III.), indicating a clear distinction in this variable specifically within infected SB plants.
Furthermore, when comparing the average lumen area of xylem vessels between cultivars, we found that the relative increase in average lumen area between infected and healthy plants was similar (P=0.47) for both PA and SB plants (Figure 2-5). Although both infected cultivars exhibited a relative increase in xylem vessel lumen area (Figure 2-5), the higher variance observed in PA measurements (Figure 2-12 C III. and I.) suggests that this trend may have occurred by chance. However, there was a significant difference (P<0.001) in the relative change in the number of xylem vessels between susceptible and tolerant cultivars (Figure 2-5). Overall, our results indicate that infected PA plants experienced a substantial increase in the number of xylem vessels, while SB plants exhibited a significant increase in the average lumen area of xylem vessels. This suggests that the mechanisms of tolerance in SB and the observed increase in CO2 fixation may be linked to enhanced investment in xylem structure.
Discussion 
Carbohydrate dynamics and callose distribution as factors implicated in HLB tolerance
HLB disease disrupts the source-sink dynamics in citrus trees, leading to imbalances in carbohydrate distribution, which have detrimental effects (J. Fan et al., 2010; Nehela & Killiny, 2020; N. Wang et al., 2017). Various factors, including phloem blockage, direct uptake by the bacterium, reduced photosynthesis, and starch accumulation, contribute to altered sugar levels in the phloem, with both CLas and citrus hosts playing roles (Pandey et al., 2022). Recent studies have revealed differential behaviors in carbohydrate export and transport speed in HLB-infected Valencia sweet orange on tolerant rootstocks, suggesting the involvement of distinct source-sink responses in tolerance (Welker et al., 2022). Our findings support this notion, as we observed a less pronounced reduction in leaf carbohydrate export in the tolerant SB mandarin compared to the susceptible cultivar, alongside increased 14CO2 fixation. Keeley et al. (2022) also reported increased fixation (on a leaf area basis) and declining starch hyperaccumulation over time with more severe infection in moderately susceptible 'Valencia' sweet orange. In our research, the faster starch accumulation observed in the tolerant SB mandarin may be attributed to increased carbon fixation and sustained carbon export, suggesting enhanced carbohydrate availability in the tolerant cultivar, potentially driven by a combination of high starch reserves and sustained phloem activity (Figure 2-14). These sugars, particularly sucrose, serve not only as an energy source but also play crucial roles in plant defense responses, including detoxification pathways (Couée et al., 2006; Keunen et al., 2013; Ribeiro et al., 2023; Rojas et al., 2014; Tang & Vashisth, 2020; N. Wang & Trivedi, 2013).
Sucrose has been associated with enhanced disease tolerance in plants, although its effects can vary depending on the specific pathosystem (Y.-H. Liu et al., 2022). For instance, transgenic tobacco and rice plants that accumulate sucrose through the expression of pathogen-related (PR) proteins have demonstrated protection against diverse plant pathogens (Gómez-Ariza et al., 2007; Murillo et al., 2003). In viral infections, sucrose plays a role in regulating plasmodesmatal aperture, contributing partially to the development of plant defense mechanisms (Y. Liu et al., 2022). However, the precise mechanisms by which sucrose is involved in plant defense against pathogens are not yet fully understood. In some cases, increased sucrose levels can actually render plants more susceptible to pathogens, as observed in transgenic Arabidopsis thaliana infected with Pseudomonas syringae (Zhang et al., 2017). Moreover, the induction of sucrose transporters (SWEET) by TAL effectors has been shown to promote the proliferation of Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae in rice (Garcia-Ruiz et al., 2021). Given that CLas is a phloem-restricted bacterium, sucrose may play a significant role in impeding pathogen movement or serving as a nutritional source for the bacterium. However, conclusive evidence to support these hypotheses is currently lacking. 
Previous research has indicated a higher occurrence of sugars in HLB-tolerant citrus cultivars, such as SB, compared to other cultivars (Killiny et al., 2017, 2018). In our study, we investigated the dynamics of carbohydrates in SB leaves and propose that the elevated sugar levels in SB may be attributed to enhanced CO2 fixation and a slight reduction in carbohydrate export. This phenomenon could potentially lead to increased sucrose availability in the tolerant mandarin as reported in different studies (Ribeiro et al., 2023). However, it is important to note that a carbohydrate-rich environment could also create favorable conditions for bacterial proliferation and result in higher bacterial titers (Zhang et al., 2017). Understanding the intricate interactions between CLas and its host poses significant challenges due to the fastidious nature of the bacterium, its uneven distribution, and its low population density in certain tissues (Achor et al., 2020). Nevertheless, the possibility of a conducive environment that may explain the higher abundance of CLas genetic material in SB leaves suggests that this cultivar could serve as a valuable model for studying plant-CLas interactions.
One well-documented response of citrus to CLas infections is the accumulation of callose in the phloem, which is believed to impede bacterial movement (Achor et al., 2020; Boava et al., 2017; Deng et al., 2019; Folimonova et al., 2009; Koh et al., 2012). This defense mechanism is conserved across various plant species as a response to both biotic and abiotic stress (B. Wang et al., 2022). However, in citrus, callose deposition can also hinder carbohydrate transport in the phloem (Welker et al., 2021). Interestingly, our study observed a consistent increase in callose deposition and gene expression of callose synthase genes in the tolerant SB mandarin, suggesting a proportional reduction in carbohydrate movement. Surprisingly, the tolerant cultivar did not show a sharp decrease in carbohydrate export, whereas the susceptible cultivar did. This could be explained by the substantial accumulation of callose in the susceptible cultivar despite its infection status, whereas in the tolerant cultivar, there was initially low callose deposition in healthy trees, followed by a steady increase upon infection. Our findings support the hypothesis that the distribution pattern of callose deposits along the phloem, rather than their quantity or size, may play a more critical role in reducing blockages and improving tolerance by maintaining phloem function. When we modeled the spatial distribution of callose deposition, we found that the tolerant SB mandarin exhibited a more clustered allocation of this polysaccharide, which could account for its less pronounced reduction in carbohydrate export (Figure 2-15). Preserving a greater number of open phloem sieve elements may result in higher total phloem conductance compared to a uniform distribution, which could impair the function of all sieves.
In our study, we employed non-invasive techniques to examine the dynamics of carbohydrates in citrus leaves, aiming to minimize the impact of confounding factors that could arise from invasive assays used to quantify callose. It is important to acknowledge that our observations were confined to the early stages of CLas infection in leaf tissues and focused on a consistent young tissue age at the leaf level. Therefore, it would be premature to draw conclusions regarding the hypothetical increase in carbohydrate availability in the tolerant cultivar as representative of the entire plant's behavior, although recent studies might suggest this behavior (Ribeiro et al., 2023). Moreover, it remains uncertain whether these mechanisms will remain consistent as the disease progresses in severity over time. Additionally, despite this research indicating a correlation between callose distribution and SB's tolerance, significant gaps in our understanding persist regarding the anatomy of citrus sieve pores, the speed of callose formation in different citrus cultivars, and the techniques for evaluating in-situ callose formation. Addressing these knowledge gaps will be essential for fully comprehending the role of callose in the development of HLB.
Defense responses, rather than symptoms or bacterium titer, may contribute to tolerance
When assessing HLB, symptoms in leaves, such as blotchy mottle, and the genetic titer of CLas have traditionally been used (Jing Fan et al., 2013; Kumar et al., 2022; Ramadugu et al., 2016; Shen et al., 2013; Stover & McCollum, 2011; Viteri et al., 2021). However, recent research has cast doubt on the reliability of these metrics for predicting yield reduction. A long-term study conducted in HLB-endemic field conditions, spanning four years, found inconsistent correlations between bacterial titers, the number of CLas bacteria in the phloem, and yield reduction (Levy et al., 2023).
Papain-like cysteine proteases (PLCPs) have multiple functions, including their capacity to activate defense mechanisms in plants (Misas‐Villamil et al., 2016). In citrus, it is believed that HLB symptoms arise from the inhibition of PLCPs by a CLas effector known as Sec-delivered effector 1 (SDE1), leading to accelerated leaf senescence (K. Clark et al., 2018; K. J. Clark et al., 2020). Our study revealed upregulation of PLCPs genes and the senescence-related gene 1 (SRG1) in the tolerant SB cultivar but downregulation in the susceptible cultivar. This pattern, particularly prominent in the young leaves of SB, suggests an early activation of PLCPs-induced defense responses, potentially resulting in premature senescence as a physiological trade-off but also facilitating faster pathogen recognition. In rice, overexpressing PLCPs has been shown to diminish the virulence of Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae by enhancing the accumulation of hydrogen peroxide and free salicylic acid (Niño et al., 2020). Similarly, the papain-like protein Rcr3 in tomatoes triggers systemic acquired resistance (SAR) boosted by salicylic acid (SA) through recognition of avirulence genes in Cladosporium fulvum (Godson & van der Hoorn, 2021). Therefore, we propose that the greater abundance of plant defense metabolites in SB (Killiny et al., 2017) may be associated with the activation of plant defense mechanisms through transcriptional upregulation of PLCPs.
Another crucial component of plant defense is Nonexpresser of PR Genes 1 (NPR1), which regulates the plant hormone salicylic acid (SA) (Mukhtar et al., 2009). In citrus, NPR1 controls the signal transduction pathway leading to systemic acquired resistance (SAR), and transgenic materials overexpressing NPR1 have exhibited enhanced tolerance in susceptible cultivars (Dutt et al., 2015; Qiu et al., 2020; Robertson et al., 2018). However, in our study, both susceptible and tolerant cultivars showed downregulation of NPR1 gene expression. Interestingly, tolerance in lines overexpressing NPR1 was associated with reduced symptoms in the tree and the absence of CLas detection over several years (Dutt et al., 2015; Soares et al., 2022). In contrast, the tolerance mechanisms in SB do not appear to be linked to either the bacterium titer or the severity of symptoms in the leaves. Hence, it is suggested that the defense mechanisms in this tolerant mandarin may not rely on upregulation of NPR1 gene expression.
The tolerance of SB to HLB seems to be associated with consistent physiological and pathological patterns, such as the upregulation of PLCPs observed in this study, rather than leaf symptoms or CLas leaf titer. However, further research is required to fully understand the role of PLCPs in citrus immunity and their interactions with potential CLas effectors. While this study assessed relative gene expression to examine the hypothesis linking defense mechanisms with SB tolerance, more comprehensive research is needed to validate the preliminary evidence and establish its deterministic nature.
Xylem's Potential Role in HLB Tolerance
Significant anatomical changes in vascular vessels have been observed in various cultivars affected by CLas infection, particularly in tolerant materials. Typical changes include hypertrophy of phloem-associated parenchyma cells, phloem collapse and disruption, xylem hyperplasia, cell wall distortion and thickening, sieve pore plugging, cambium degeneration, starch accumulation, and callose deposition (Aritua et al., 2013; Deng et al., 2019; Ed & Cody, 2015; Jing Fan et al., 2012, 2013; Johnson et al., 2014; Kim et al., 2009; Koh et al., 2012). While secondary phloem growth in older leaves has been associated with the tolerance of Sugar Belle® (Deng et al., 2019), the contribution of xylem has been largely overlooked. Given the observed increase in 14CO2 fixation, we investigated the potential role of xylem as a complementary mechanism of tolerance in Sugar Belle®, alongside phloem regeneration (Deng et al., 2019). Our study revealed that the susceptible cultivar exhibited an increase in the number of xylem vessels, possibly indicating xylem hypertrophy in response to further infection stages. In contrast, SB showed no significant change in the number of xylem vessels but displayed an increase in average lumen area and relative xylem area. This suggests an enhanced investment in hydraulic conductivity in infected SB plants, specifically in the leaf midribs. Our findings suggest that the increased investment in xylem structure, compared to the response of the susceptible cultivar, is associated with HLB tolerance in Sugar Belle®.
The role of xylem in CLas disease has been overlooked due to the bacterium's phloem-restricted nature. However, vessel size is a crucial parameter in plant structure-function relationships (Tyree & Zimmermann, 2013), as vessel radius is proportional to its hydraulic conductance to the power of four, making slightly larger vessels significantly more efficient (Tyree & Ewers, 1991). In citrus, larger xylem vessel lumen diameters have been linked to increased root hydraulic conductance, leaf transpiration rate, and leaf biomass (Rodríguez-Gamir et al., 2010). We hypothesize that the relatively greater proportion of xylem area and increased average lumen area of vessels in SB may provide an anatomical advantage in reducing HLB-related impairments, such as water deficit (Hamido et al., 2019). Preserving xylem hydraulic conductance in HLB-infected SB may allow for maximum photosynthetic rates if limiting factors such as leaf water status, stomatal aperture, and phloem load are mitigating (Nardini et al., 2011). This could contribute to the observed higher carbon fixation rates, as actual photosynthetic rates are closely linked to stomatal conductance in the presence or absence of HLB (Keeley et al., 2022). Thus, greater xylem hydraulic conductance may enable leaves to maintain high stomatal conductance in this isohydric species (Dzikiti et al., 2007).
This study highlights the potential involvement of the xylem, which has been neglected as a contributor to HLB impairments, in the tolerance of SB. However, it is important to note that the conclusions drawn from this research are limited to the specific organs and time of infection examined in the assays. While the findings provide evidence supporting the influence of the xylem in HLB tolerance, further research is needed to fully understand its role and determine its significance in mitigating the detrimental effects of the disease. These findings open up new avenues of investigation focusing on the xylem as a potential contributor that could partially compensate for HLB-related impairments.

 
Figure 2 1. Quantification of phloem transversal plugging in citrus bark peels. A. Object 87 identity files in format HDF5 that are the output of Welker & Levy, 2022 procedure were used as the 88 main input. B. Files were visualized and exported to png using the HDFView tool (v.3.1.4). C. Images 89 were manually rotated until the phloem tissue was perpendicular to the image base and converted to 90 masks using ImageJ. D. Masks were stored as text images, “#” characters indicate pixels with callose 91 deposition and 0 values depicts background pixels with no callose. E. Columns with callose deposits (red) 92 and without callose deposits (green) were counted. F. Calculation of transversal plugging; by default, the 93 total number of columns corresponds to the number of pixels of the picture’s width (1024 pixcels).

Table 2-1 Primers of genes examined in this study.
Name	Forward Primer	Reverse Primer	NCBI Reference sequence
GAPDH	TGGCGACCAAAG GCTACTC	TTGCCGCACCAGTTGATG	XM_006446802
CalS3	GGCCTCCGTTCTTACTTGCT	ACACTCCTTGACAG CACAGG	XM_006492601
CalS7	GACGCCTAACCGAG TACCTGC	GTGCAGCTGGTGAT CCATCA	XM_006484824
CalS9	TCCTTTCTCGAATTGGCCGT	TGTCTGTGCGCGAT ATGAGG	XM_006492604
CalS11	GATGTGTACCGCTT GGGTCA	AGCAAGATAAAGAC GCCCCC	XM_006467737
CalS12	CTTGGGTCAGCGTG TTTTGG	CTCCTCGCAGTGTG CAGTTA	XM_025092689
GHf17	GTTCCGGTTCCACTGGCTAT	CTAACATGCAGGCCACCTCA	orange1.1g015273
CsBP	TGACGCCATCTTGGATGCTG	ATTCGTCAACGCTCCGTCAC	AJ000081.1
Csßg1	ATCTTGTTCCCGCCATGAGA	GCTTAAAGGAGCCTGCTGAC	orange1.1g019755m.g
CsNPR1	TGCTGCATGTTGCTGCAATG	GCCTTAGTGAGCCGCTTTGA	XM_006475416.3
Ferr	  TCCACTTCGCTTCCAACC	CATCTGCCAATGTAAGGTGTCT	Cs1g25510.1   
 

 
Figure 2 2. Quantification of phloem and xylem cell morphometrics in ImageJ. A. Raw image. B. Manual labeling of phloem, xylem, and pith boundaries. Pith area [red] corresponds to parenchyma cells in the center of the section, xylem [magenta] corresponds to xylem vessels and fibers, and phloem [yellow] corresponds to phloem parenchyma and sieve element cells excluding phloem fibers. C. Creation of individual masks corresponding to every section applying a color threshold macro. D. Conversion of mask to regions of interests (.roi). E. Conversion of the raw image to 8-bites. F. Overlap of stored regions of interest in the 8-bites converted raw image. G. Application of manual threshold to select cell lumen. H. Creation of the composite selection using XOR operator; Xylem vessels and fibers were selected by subtracting xylem boundaries to the pith area; Magnifier glass depicts a close-up look at the selected area. I. Counting and measuring of cell lumen area; a threshold of 8 um2 was set to exclude xylem fibers from xylem vessels.
 
Figure 2 3 A) 14CO2 fixation of infected plants with respect to healthy plants in the susceptible pineapple (PA) sweet orange and the tolerant Sugar Belle® (SB) mandarin. B) Relative gene expression of Ferredoxin – NADP reductase in leaves of different ages of healthy and infected PA and SB. C) 14C-carbohydrate export of infected plants with respect to healthy plants of PA and SB. D) Starch content of infected and healthy plants of PA and SB. The dashed lines (µ=0) represent the theoretical estimate obtained when values of healthy and infected plants within the same cultivar are equal. Yellow triangle depicts the mean. P-values in A, C, and D were obtained through Welche’s t-test. P-values in B were obtained through Wilcox’s test. In A and C means were compared to µ=0. Old leaves= 273 ± 30 days, medium leaves= 101.4 ± 22 days, and young leaves= 27.1 ± 9 days. Error bars indicate standard error. 


 
Figure 2 4. Relative gene expression of Ferredoxin – NADP reductase (Ferr - Cs1g25510) within leaves of the same age of healthy and infected Sugar Belle® P-values were obtained through Welche’s t-test 



 
Figure 2 5 Comparison of the relative changes generated by HLB between the susceptible Pineapple (PA) sweet orange and the tolerant Sugar Belle® (SB) mandarin through permutational test of means. Numbers on the SB panel are P values. *= variable compared through two sample t-test. **=variable compared through paired t-test.  

 
Figure 2-6 A) Callose counts of infected and healthy plants in the susceptible Pineapple (PA) sweet orange and the tolerant Sugar Belle® (SB) mandarin. B)  Mean size of callose counts of infected and healthy PA and SB. C) Mean total area of callose counts of infected and healthy PA and SB. D) Mean distance to the closest neighbor of callose counts of PA and SB. E) Relative gene expression of callose synthase and glucanase genes in leaves of different ages of healthy and infected PA and SB. F and G) Images of Ilastik callose classification in the phloem of bark peels stained with aniline blue (scale bar= 200 µm) F.I.) Example of healthy PA showing more callose counts. F.II.) Example of infected PA showing greater mean size of callose counts. G.I.) Example of healthy SB showing less callose counts. G.II.) Example of infected SB showing bigger but transversally aggregated callose counts.  Yellow triangle depicts the mean. P-values in A, C, and D were obtained through Welche’s t-test. P-values in B and E were obtained through Wilcox’s test. Old leaves= 273 ± 30 days, medium leaves= 101.4 ± 22 days, and young leaves= 27.1 ± 9 days 

 
Figure 2-7. Percentage of transversal plugging in bark peels phloem in Sugar Belle® mandarin (SB) and pineapple sweet orange (PA). Yellow triangle depicts the mean. P-values were obtained through Welche’s T-test.




 
Figure 2-8 Relative gene expression of callose synthase genes within leaves of the same age of healthy and infected pineapple sweet orange. P-values were obtained through Welche’s T-test.

 
Figure 2-9 A) Mean symptom severity score of infected Pineapple (PA) sweet orange and Sugar Belle® (SB) mandarin assessed by 15 evaluators. B)  Relative quantification of CLas genetic material of infected PA and SB. C) Relative gene expression of PLCPs and senesce related genes (CaAALP, CsRD19, and SRG1B) and defense (NPR1) genes in leaves of different ages of healthy and infected PA and SB. Grey lines between cultivars connects the mean values of the observations from the same evaluator. Yellow triangle depicts the mean. P-value in A was obtained through paired Welche’s t-test and B through a two tails Welche’s t-test. P-values in C were obtained through Wilcox’s test. Old leaves= 273 ± 30 days, medium leaves= 101.4 ± 22 days, and young leaves= 27.1 ± 9 days


 
Figure 2-10. Relative gene expression of PLCP and Senescence related gene 1 (SRG1) within leaves of the same age of healthy and pineapple sweet orange. P-values were obtained through Welche’s T-test.
 
Figure 2-11. Relative gene expression of PLCP and Senescence related gene 1 (SRG1) within leaves of the same age of healthy and infected Sugar Belle®. P-values were obtained through Welche’s T-test. 
 
Figure 2-12  A.I) Petiole sections of healthy and infected Pineapple (PA) sweet orange and Sugar Belle® (SB) mandarin (scale bar= 200 µm). A.II) Area of vascular bundles of petioles of healthy and infected PA and SB. B.I) Leaf midrib sections of healthy and infected PA and SB (scale bar= 100 µm). B.II) Area of vascular bundles of midribs of healthy and infected PA and SB. C.I) Comparison of HLB affected and healthy PA exhibited an increase variance in the xylem vessel morphometrics and diseased and healthy SB evidencing maintenance of xylem vessel’s morphometrics;  C.II to C.IV) Anatomical metrics of xylem vessels. In  A.I and B.I red, magenta and yellow depict the area of pith, xylem, and phloem, respectively. In C.I Xv: xylem vessel, Cs: cambium strip, Phv: Phloem sieve element, Php: phloem parenchyma. P-values in A.II were obtained through Wilcox’s test. P-value in B.II, C.II, and C.III were obtained through two tails Welche’s t-test. Error bars indicate standard error.
 
Figure 2-13 A. Total area of petiole of healthy and infected PA and SB P-values were 60 obtained through Wilcox’s test. B) Comparison of the relative changes in petiole morphometrics 61 generated by HLB between the susceptible Pineapple (PA) sweet orange and the tolerant Sugar Belle® 62 (SB) mandarin through permutational test of means.
 
Figure 2-14. Model of the carbohydrate dynamics at the leaf level in the tolerant Sugar Belle® (SB) mandarin and the susceptible pineapple sweet orange (PA). The effect in the 14CO2 fixation and 14C-carbohydrate export rate in the infected plants are calculated based on obtained experimental output. Comparisons are carried out assuming that healthy SB and PA have the same behavior.
 
Figure 2-15 Model of callose accumulation in bark peel phloem in the tolerant Sugar Belle® (SB) mandarin and the susceptible pineapple sweet orange (PA). The hypothetical model was obtained selecting a possible outcome of a random uniform distribution that follows the experimentally obtained callose counts and mean distance to the closest neighbor.

 
CHAPTER 3
GA AND 2DDG AS INDUCERS OF TOLERANCE IN SUSCEPTIBLE PINEAPPLE SWEET ORANGE: 

Introduction
HLB triggers systemic and chronic immune responses in citrus phloem tissue, leading to the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and callose accumulation (Ma et al., 2022). The overproduction of ROS, primarily hydrogen peroxide, causes oxidative stress and cell death, while excessive callose deposition can disrupt phloem connectivity, affecting carbon partitioning and normal plant development (Koh et al., 2012; Ma et al., 2022). In the absence of commercially available and marketable resistant cultivars, several management practices have been suggested to mitigate the impact of HLB on ROS production, growth reduction, and callose deposition. This chapter examines two promising approaches: the foliar application of the callose inhibitor 2-Deoxy-D-glucose (2-DDG) and the plant growth regulator gibberellic acid (GA).
GA is a versatile plant growth regulator with a wide array of functions. It promotes stem elongation, seed germination, flowering, fruit development, and enhances stress tolerance in plants (Fahad et al., 2015; Gupta & Chakrabarty, 2013; Marth et al., 1956). In citrus, GA3, a specific form of gibberellic acid, plays a significant role in various aspects of growth, flowering, fruit quality, and shelf life. GA3 application at specific times can inhibit flowering in sweet orange and mandarin varieties, affecting bud sprouting and the differentiation of flower primordia (Guardiola et al., 1982). Moreover, GA3 treatment in citrus can regulate flowering genes, such as FLOWERING LOCUS T (CiFT), influencing floral induction and the transition from floral to vegetative growth (Muñoz-Fambuena et al., 2012). GA3 applications have been found to improve fruit set and yield under certain circumstances, although carbohydrate availability rather than GA levels may be the primary limiting factor for yield (Garmendia et al., 2019). Additionally, GA3 enhances the physical and biochemical properties of citrus fruit, including weight, firmness, juice recovery, TSS/acid ratio, and antioxidant content, thereby improving quality and extending shelf life (Mehouachi et al., 1996; Rokaya et al., 2016; Talat et al., 2020). These examples collectively illustrate the broad utilization of gibberellic acid in citrus cultivation, providing valuable insights into its effects on flowering, fruit development, and postharvest characteristics.
Particularly in the context of HLB, the utilization of gibberellic acid in citrus, is an area of ongoing research with promising results. GA seems to be capable of mitigating the detrimental effects of HLB by upregulating genes encoding H2O2-scavenging enzymes and downregulating NADPH oxidases, which are involved in the production of ROS caused by the disease (Ma et al., 2022). This suggests that GA may help to reduce oxidative stress in the plant. Furthermore, GA appears to improve the hormonal balance and plant defense response, as well as photosynthesis, which in turn contributes to better tree vitality, canopy density, and fruit production despite the presence of HLB (Singh et al., 2022). Notably, while GA treatment cannot completely eradicate the bacterium that causes HLB, it can help ameliorate the impairments associated with the disease, such as yield decline, reduced fruit size, increased preharvest fruit drop, and rapid tree health decline. As such, GA provides a potential practical treatment for citrus growers until a complete cure for HLB or HLB-resistant cultivars can be developed.
Another promising management practice for mitigating the impairments caused by HLB is the application of the callose inhibitor 2-Deoxy-D-glucose (2-DDG). Callose, a helical polymer of β-1,3-glucan, is synthesized by callose synthases (CalS), which are transmembrane proteins involved in the transfer of UDP-glucose from sucrose, resulting in the formation of gelatinous masses in plant tissue (De Storme & Geelen, 2014; Verma & Hong, 2001). While callose plays a crucial role in plant defense mechanisms (Wu et al., 2018), excessive callose deposition can have negative consequences in the context of HLB (Koh et al., 2012; Welker et al., 2021). The infection by CLas triggers immune responses and callose accumulation, disrupting nutrient and signal flow in citrus phloem tissue and potentially worsening the severity of the disease (Koh et al., 2012; Ma et al., 2022).
The application of 2-DDG in citrus aims to inhibit callose deposition and maintain normal phloem function, facilitating nutrient and signal flow between sieve elements in HLB-infected trees. Although 2-DDG has demonstrated beneficial effects in combating HLB, its direct callose inhibition properties in HLB-affected citrus have not been explicitly demonstrated (J. Li et al., 2016). Nonetheless, the rationale behind using 2-DDG is that by reducing callose accumulation, it could potentially improve overall tree health despite the presence of the disease. This approach offers prospects for managing HLB and mitigating its adverse effects.
The objective of this chapter is to investigate the effects of the exogenous application of the plant growth regulator gibberellic acid (GA) and the callose inhibitor 2-Deoxy-D-glucose (2-DDG) on susceptible pineapple sweet orange trees. The chapter aims to determine the specific features related to HLB-tolerance that GA induces and discuss their physiological implications. Additionally, it addresses the question of whether the application of 2-DDG leads to a decrease in callose accumulation and subsequently reduces the impairments associated with callose deposition in the susceptible cultivar. By examining these aspects, the chapter aims to contribute to a deeper understanding of the potential benefits and limitations of GA and 2-DDG in managing HLB in susceptible citrus trees.
Materials and Methods
Plant materials and growth conditions
To assess the effectiveness of gibberellic acid (GA) and the callose inhibitor 2-deoxy-D-glucose (2-DDG), budwoods of pineapple sweet orange from Huanglongbing (HLB)-infected trees were collected and grafted onto Volkamer lemon rootstock in August 2021. The grafted plants were housed in a temperature-controlled greenhouse at 27°C, following a natural day/night cycle. The greenhouse was located at the Citrus Research and Education Center (CREC) in Lake Alfred, FL. Uniform three-month-old trees were selected for the experiment, employing a completely randomized design with one plant as the experimental unit and five biological replicates per treatment. As the applications of GA and 2-DDG were conducted at different times, a control group was included for each treatment. Thus, the GA-applied pineapple sweet orange trees [GA+] were compared against the control group called GA-, while the 2-DDG-applied pineapple sweet orange trees [2-DDG] were compared against the NO_DDG control group. Each week, new shoots measuring at least 5 centimeters in length were labeled to track their age and development.
Gibberellic acid application
On May 5, 2022, a solution containing 40 mg/L of the active ingredient of ProGibb® LV Plus and 0.015% of Induce Nonionic Low Foam Wetter/Spreader Adjuvant was applied to five trees (treatment GA+). As a control group, another set of five trees was sprayed using the same procedures but with only 0.015% of the Induce Nonionic Low Foam Wetter/Spreader Adjuvant. After calibrating the sprayer, each treatment was thoroughly sprayed for 45 seconds at a rate of 0.26 L/min, ensuring complete coverage of the trees. For the GA+ and GA- treatments, the trees were temporarily removed from the greenhouse, sprayed, left for one hour, and then returned to the greenhouse under the same conditions described earlier. New shoots emerging after the treatment were labeled weekly to record the date of emergence until August 2022. An additional application following the same procedure was performed on September 27, 2022, and samples were collected two weeks after this last application for starch, bacterial genetic material, and callose analysis.  
Growth measurement
On August 15, 2022, the number of shoots on the trees was evaluated, and the age and emergence time of each branch were recorded. For branches that emerged after the application of GA+ treatment, the total length of the branch was measured from the base of the node where it emerged to the branch tip. Additionally, the width of the branch was measured at the base, middle, and tip using a digital caliper. The length of the branch from the base to the middle was also measured, and the total number of leaves per branch was counted. The stem surface area was calculated using the formula previously described (Keeley et al., 2022):
Equation 2:
"Stem surface area"=π(r_1+r_2)√(〖(r_1-r_2)〗^2+〖h_1〗^2 )+π(r_2+r_3)√(〖(r_2-r_3)〗^2+〖h_2〗^2 )
 r1= radius of stem base
 r2 = radius of stem middle
r3 = radius of stem tip
 h1 = length between measurement point of r1 and r2
 h2 = length between measurement point of r2 and r3
	On December 24, 2022, a destructive sampling method was employed to measure the total foliar area of the trees. The measurements were conducted using an LI-3100C area meter from Li-Cor Corporation (Lincoln, NE, USA), following the instructions provided by the manufacturer. The process involved calibrating the equipment, preparing the leaf samples, positioning them on the sample holder of the meter, measuring the leaf area, recording the obtained values, and repeating the process for additional samples.
Application of 2-deoxy-D-glucose (2-DDG)
On September 28, 2022, a solution of 5 mM concentration of 2-DDG and 0.015% of Induce Nonionic Low Foam Wetter/Spreader Adjuvant was sprayed, following the same application procedures as described for the gibberellic acid application. Five one-year-old graft-inoculated pineapple sweet orange trees were treated with this 2-DDG solution (2-DDG treatment), while another set of five trees was sprayed solely with the adjuvant (NO_DDG). The preparation of the 2-DDG solution took the following information into consideration:
Table 2. Features of the 2-DDG used in the experiment
Molar weight of 2-DDG	164.14 g/mol
Purity of the product	99%
Brand	ACROS organics
Lot	A0430110
Day received	04/04/2022
Day opened 	04/04/2026

Samples for starch, bacterial genetic material, and callose determination were collected two weeks after the application mentioned above.
Quantification of starch and relative CLas genetic material 
Two weeks after the application of gibberellic acid and 2-deoxy-D-glucose (2-DDG), leaf samples were collected to quantify starch content and the presence of CLas genetic material. Comparisons were made between the treatment groups and their respective controls. Five trees per treatment were used, and two leaf samples within the same age range were collected from each tree. In total, six leaf samples per biological replicate (two young, two medium, and two old) were collected. The quantification process followed the same procedures described in the second chapter for "Quantification of starch" and "Relative quantification of CLas genetic material." The analysis involved averaging the results from the two replicates of leaves within the same age range. The average age in days for young, medium, and old leaves in the GA+ and GA- were 22.61 (+/- 13.8), 87.82 (+/- 13.6), and 214.5 (+/-32.7). In contrast young, medium, and old leaves in the 2DDG and NO_DDG were 43.25 (+/- 10.8), 101.8 (+/- 28.5), and 211.4 (+/-8.36).
Total quantification of callose through fluorescence spectroscopy
For total callose quantification, three leaf punches were sampled from the middle sections of midribs, taken from the same leaves used for starch and CLas quantification. A technique developed by Chiara Bernardini and Alessandro Franco at the Citrus Research and Education Center was employed (not published). The samples were fixed in cold 96% ethanol immediately after collection and left overnight at room temperature. Ethanol was replaced every 24 hours until complete removal of chlorophyll. The dry tissues were weighed and placed in high-performance screw cap tubes with 5 metal beads of 2.8mm diameter. After rinsing with DW water, 750 µL of 200-proof ethanol was added. The samples were ground using a Precellys® 24 homogenizer and centrifuged for 5 minutes at 400g. The pellet was washed with 100% ethanol and then three times with 20% ethanol, with centrifugation steps in between. Subsequently, the pellet was sonicated for 30 min in 1 mL of 1M NaOH and incubated at 90°C for 90 minutes with agitation. After centrifugation at 10,000g for 15 minutes, the supernatant was used for callose quantification. The callose assay mixture contained 200 ul of supernatant, 400 ul of 0.1% (w/v) aniline blue, 210 ml of 1 M HCl and 590 ml of fresh 1 M glycine-NaOH buffer (pH 9.5). The reaction mixture was incubated at 50°C for 20 minutes, and fluorescence intensities were measured using a BioTekR©FLx800 plate reader and Gen 5R©software (BioTek Instruments Inc., Winooski, VT, USA) at excitation and emission wavelengths of 360 ± 40 nm and 485 ± 20 nm, respectively. Callose amounts were expressed as milligram equivalents of pachyman using a pachyman standard curve, and fluorescence intensities in the absence of aniline blue stain were subtracted from intensities in the presence of the stain. The average of three technical replicates was used for analysis. 
Statiscal analysis 
	A completely randomized design was used for this study, and statistical analysis was conducted using R [v3.02] (R Core Team, 2022). The Shapiro-Wilk test was used to assess the normality of the data. For variables that exhibited a normal distribution, a two-tailed Welch's T-test was employed to compare means, assuming unequal variances. Comparisons were made between treatments and their respective control groups (GA+ against GA- and 2-DDG against NO_DDG) for two main reasons: the treatments were not applied on the same day, and the application of GA, as a plant growth regulator, could affect shoot induction and development, potentially altering leaf age compared to other treatments. Consequently, the young, medium, and old leaves across treatments may not be of the same age due to the effects of GA on shoot timing. These factors might confound a direct comparison between GA+ and 2_DDG treatments. For variables that did not follow a normal distribution, the non-parametric Wilcox's test was used to compare medians. The resulting P-values from the statistical tests were automatically incorporated into the figures using the ggpubr package [v0.4.0] (Kassambara, 2020). The lm function was used to fit the linear regression model in R, with the dependent variable and independent variables specified accordingly. Model diagnostics were performed to assess assumptions such as linearity, homoscedasticity, and normality of residuals. Once the lm object was obtained, ggplot was utilized to create visualizations (Villanueva & Chen, 2019). The complete raw data and fully reproducible code for the analyses are available in the following repository: https://github.com/jrobledob/GA_and_DDG
Results
Effects of gibberellic acid on growth, shoot development, and morphometric variables in HLB-susceptible pineapple sweet orange trees: overall enhancements observed
To better understand the effect of gibberellic acid (GA) on the growth of HLB-susceptible sweet orange trees, specifically the pineapple cultivar in this research, several measurements and observations were made. This morphometric study involved two treatments: the application of gibberellic acid (GA+) and the absence of gibberellic acid application or control group (GA-). Prior to the application of gibberellic acid on May 5, 2023, both treatments exhibited a similar trend in the cumulative number of shoots. However, there was an initial difference of 5 shoots between the trees used in each treatment at the time of application. Upon application, both GA+ and GA- treatments displayed a steady increase in cumulative shoot numbers, with a sharp rise in mid-July 2022 (Figure 3-1).
Interestingly, the shoot peak in mid-July 2022 for the GA+ treatment was not as pronounced as that of the GA- treatment. As a result, the trees in the GA- treatment were able to reach the same cumulative number of shoots as the GA+ treatment, with 58 shoots after 4 months of application, besides starting with a difference of 5 shoots at the beginning of the experiment. Between January and March 2022, before the treatments were applied, the frequency of shoots was 45% for GA- and 55% for GA+. However, following the treatments, the GA+ trees exhibited a reduction in frequency, reaching a percentage between 43% and 44% from April to August. This reduction was mainly influenced by the increased shoot numbers in the GA- treatment. Nonetheless, these differences in frequencies were not statistically significant (P=0.55, Figure 3-2).
Moving on to morphometric variables, various measurements were taken to evaluate the effect of GA on the growth of the HLB-graft inoculated pineapple sweet orange. Although no significant differences were observed (P<0.05) in the number of leaves per branch and the different lengths of branches evaluated after the application of GA in May, there were significant differences in other variables. Specifically, the GA+ treatment consistently exhibited higher average values (ranging from 23% to 38%) compared to the control treatment not only in terms of total length, from the base to the middle of the branch, and from the middle to the tip but also in the total number of leaves per branch (Figure 3-3). Furthermore, when comparing the widths of branches and the stem surface area between treatments, significant results (P<0.05) were obtained. Plants that were treated with gibberellic acid showed higher average values (ranging from 41% to 51%) in different width measurements. These measurements, combined with the length of the branches, indicated that the stem surface area in GA+ treatment was 67% larger than in GA- plants (Figure 3-4).
The results suggest that GA enhances the growth of early HLB-affected trees, potentially facilitating better development. However, when a destructive sampling was conducted in December 2022 to measure the total foliar area, total number of leaves, and average area per leaf, GA- trees showed slightly larger overall values (ranging from 30% to 5%) in all these variables. Despite this observation, statistically significant differences were not obtained (minimum P=0.34, Figure 3-5). Since this measurement included leaves both before and after the application of GA, it indicates that the effects of GA application might be temporary, requiring constant applications for long-term benefits.
Dynamic interaction of callose and starch accumulation in citrus leaves: age-specific responses and CLas titer variations under GA and 2-DDG treatments
To investigate the impact of two management practices, application of 2-DDG and GA, on carbohydrate accumulation in the leaves, starch content was measured in leaves of varying ages. Independent control groups or treatments were employed for accurate comparisons as the experiments were conducted at different times. Overall, the GA+ treatment showed a 12% reduction in starch content compared to the GA- control group, although statistical differences were not significant (P=0.52, Figure 3-6A). In contrast, the 2-DDG treatment exhibited an general 15% increase in starch content, but significant differences were not obtained (P=0.38, Figure 3-6B).
When analyzing the starch content in leaves of different ages, no significant differences at P<0.05 were observed for both the GA+ and 2-DDG treatments (Figure 3-7A and B). However, a notable distinction was observed in old leaves between the 2-DDG treatment and its control group (P=0.06, Figure 3-7B). In this leaf age category, the 2-DDG treatment resulted in a 27% reduction in starch accumulation, indicating that the foliar application of this callose inhibitor could be more effective in older leaves.
The presence and direct impact of CLas on HLB disease, as well as the relationship between the quantity of the bacterium's genetic material in citrus tissues and disease progression, remain poorly understood and controversial. In this study, we assessed the titer of CLas following the application of both GA and 2DDG treatments, comparing the results with control groups for each treatment aiming to understand the effect of this management practices in the behavior or mobility of the pathogen.
Overall, no significant effects on the relative bacterial titer, expressed as ∆Cts, were observed in any of the experimental groups (Figure 3-8). However, intriguingly, statistically significant differences were exclusively detected in medium-aged leaves within the GA+ treatment (P=0.02, Figure 3-9A). These findings indicate a significantly higher content of CLas genetic material in the medium-aged leaves of trees treated with GA. Notably, medium-aged leaves have traditionally been recognized as the most suitable stage for determining CLas titer in citrus leaves.
In our study, we aimed to target the mechanisms of the disease by assessing callose accumulation using 2-DDG treatment. The total callose content in midribs was measured in leaves of different ages. Additionally, considering that GA is known for delaying senescence and its association with reactive oxygen species and callose accumulation, we also measured callose content after the application of GA.
Overall, the GA+ treatment displayed lower total callose content in midribs compared to its control group, while the 2-DDG treatment showed higher values. However, these differences in averages can be attributed to chance and the stochastic nature of this variable in pineapple sweet orange trees (minimum P=0.30, Figure 3-10). Similarly, no significant differences were observed between the target treatments (GA+ and 2-DDG) and control groups (GA- and no_2-DDG) in any of the evaluated leaf ages (Figure 3-11).
Interestingly, in the 2-DDG treatment, a significant linear relationship was observed between callose and starch content (Figure 3-12). This relationship was not observed in other treatments. The results indicate a positive linear relationship between these two variables, with callose content in the 2-DDG treatment explaining 34% of the variance in starch concentration. It is important to note that leaves of different ages exhibited different behaviors in this relationship, although the trend remained similar. Thus, this treatment demonstrated that as callose accumulation is reduced, starch content in the leaf reduced.
Discussion 
The role of gibberellic acid in enhancing growth and potentially the tree’s photosynthetic capacity
The application of the plant growth regulator Gibberellic Acid (GA) in susceptible pineapple sweet orange trees was found to enhance tree growth. This was specifically evident in increased branch length, width, and the number of leaves per branch, as detailed in this chapter. However, the regulator did not positively influence the number of shoots over time. This phenomenon may be attributed to the role of auxin signaling in triggering leaf development and organogenesis in plants (Schaller et al., 2015). Once the primordium forms, growth is regulated by a coordination of auxin, cytokinin, gibberellic acid, and brassinosteroids (Kalve et al., 2014). For instance, GA promotes cell proliferation by suppressing cell cycle inhibitors such as KIP-RELATED PROTEIN2 (KRP2), SIAMESE, and DELLA, while facilitating cell expansion by promoting the expression of expansin, a cell wall loosening enzyme (Ali et al., 2020; Cho & Kende, 1997; Eckardt, 2007). In rice, the presence of gibberellic acid initiates the expression of ACCELERATOR OF INTERNODE ELONGATION 1 (ACE1), resulting in internode elongation (Nagai et al., 2020). Conversely, Arabidopsis with GA-deficient phenotypes display lost apical dominance in their inflorescence stalks, producing numerous lateral branches with short internodes, while also exhibiting delayed senescence (Devaiah et al., 2009). These findings support our results and could explain why vegetative growth was more prevalent in GA-treated trees compared to the control group.
Interestingly, among all the growth variables examined in this chapter, branch width stood out as the most significant factor, exerting a considerable influence on stem surface area in citrus. This surface area is vital for photosynthesis and adaptation to HLB (Huanglongbing) stress, which can lead to reduced leaf size (Keeley et al., 2022). The change in width could potentially be attributed to varied responses of the stem and its vasculature to the application of exogenous Gibberellic acid. GA has been found to promote fiber differentiation in both upward and downward directions in the xylem, particularly when combined with auxin (Aloni, 2021). In the case of lignin biosynthesis in the secondary walls of fibers and vessels, auxin and gibberellin play regulatory roles (Aloni et al., 1990; Tokunaga et al., 2006). For instance, in Zinnia elegans, the addition of GA3 significantly increased lignin content in tracheary elements (Tokunaga et al., 2006). Similarly, in young pine seedlings, tracheids can differentiate from young parenchyma cells when exposed to both auxin and gibberellin (Kalev & Aloni, 1998). Moreover, when gibberellin was applied to sunflower (Helianthus annuus) roots during irrigation, it resulted in substantial growth of the stem and increased production of secondary fibers (Aloni, 2021). These findings, coupled with the results observed in the previous chapter regarding the enhanced investment in xylem structure in Sugar Belle®, lead us to hypothesize that the increased stem width may be associated with xylem differentiation and development. However, further experiments are necessary to validate this hypothesis. 
While the symptoms of HLB are predominantly observed in the leaves, it is important to note that this disease also impacts canopy morphology, leading to the development of adaptations in affected trees (Keeley et al., 2022). Considering that the most significant difference between GA+ and GA- treatments was observed in the stem surface area, it is hypothesized that this tissue plays a significant role in acclimating to HLB. Interestingly, studies have shown that HLB reduces net CO2 assimilation at the leaf level but not at the whole shoot level. This phenomenon can be explained by the saturation of net CO2 assimilation in the shoot at high irradiance, with green stems exhibiting higher photosynthetic rates compared to leaves (Keeley et al., 2022).
Since the net photosynthetic rate and photosynthetic area of a plant determine its photosynthetic capacity, increasing the photosynthetic area can potentially enhance crop yield (W. Hu et al., 2020). In an HLB scenario where leaves are severely affected, an alternative strategy to increase the photosynthetic area could be through the expansion of stem surface area, which has shown to be photosynthetically more efficient than leaves (Keeley et al., 2022). Thus, an increase in stem surface area through the application of GA might temporarily enhance the photosynthetic area, thereby helping the plant increase its photosynthetic capacity and ultimately improve yield. In field studies, monthly foliar application of GA from September to January has been demonstrated to result in a 30% increase in yield (Vashisth, 2021).
Interestingly, the relative quantity of CLas genetic material was found to be significantly higher in medium-age leaves of pineapple sweet orange trees treated with gibberellic acid. This finding aligns with the results obtained in the second chapter of this thesis, which showed that the tolerant cultivar, Sugar Belle, exhibited a higher relative amount of CLas genetic material compared to the susceptible cultivar. It is worth noting that CLas titer has historically been used to assess resistance or tolerance against HLB. However, several field studies suggest that this variable alone does not fully explain the tolerance observed in certain materials under real-world scenarios (Stover et al., 2016). We hypothesize that the increase in vegetative growth resulting from the GA+ treatment may facilitate bacterial dispersion and movement within the plant. However, there are still significant gaps in our understanding of the precise distribution and movement of the bacterium within the plant, as well as the contribution of high CLas genetic material titer to disease severity and fruit drop. Addressing these gaps is crucial to fully comprehend the real impact that this variable may have on disease development and epidemic progression. 
Exploring the Potential Effects of 2-DDG Application in Infected Susceptible Citrus: Enhancing Callose Quantification Techniques for Improved Detection
Starch accumulation in the leaves is a prominent characteristic associated with HLB, and it has eventually been utilized as a preliminary test in the field to identify CLas-infected citrus trees (Takushi et al., 2007). In healthy citrus trees, carbohydrates produced during photosynthesis are transported to growing tissues or stored in various organs (J. Fan et al., 2010). However, HLB-affected trees experience impaired carbohydrate movement from leaves to other plant parts, and this impairment is believed to involve callose accumulation in the phloem (Koh et al., 2012).
In this chapter, we did not directly demonstrate that the foliar application of 2-DDG reduces callose content in the midrib. However, significant differences in starch accumulation, specifically in old leaves, and a positive linear relationship between starch and callose content were observed following the application of 2-DDG. These findings suggest that the application may indeed have an effect on carbohydrate accumulation in the leaves, possibly by reducing callose accumulation in the phloem. However, the method used for the quantification of callose in this chapter did not possibly detect this difference.
Although this method allows for cheaper and more convenient quantification of callose in field conditions compared to confocal microscopy, used in the second chapter, it has limitations. Firstly, since the phloem is not isolated, the measured callose content represents the callose content of the entire sample. Secondly, other autofluorescent tissues or substances may generate noise in the final quantification (Kohler et al., 2000), and thirdly, the tissue structure is destroyed, preventing the use of imaging techniques to remove noise generated by fluorescent artifacts (Welker & Levy, 2022).
We hypothesize that utilizing an alternative technique to quantify callose in 2-DDG-treated trees may provide a better understanding of callose dynamics in the phloem. Additionally, the observed reduction in starch content after the application of 2-DDG may indicate the induction of enhanced acclimation conditions in infected trees. It is crucial, however, to demonstrate the reduction in callose in these acclimation conditions. If this result can be established, we could hypothesize that a reduction in the hyperaccumulation of starch induced by 2-DDG may positively impact photosynthetic efficiency in infected trees. This reduction in starch accumulation would help alleviate the impairments caused by this disorder, such as altered carbon partitioning, reduction in the affection of photosynthetic efficiency by restricting the availability of chloroplasts (Schaffer et al., 1986), and restoration osmotic balance within the leaf cells, potentially preventing disruptions in normal cell functions and water relations (Dong & Beckles, 2019).

 
Figure 3-116 Cumulative number of shoots from October 2021 to August 2022 of 
gibberellic acid treated and untreated pineapple sweet orange trees. Dashed vertical line indicate the date when GA+ and GA- were applied

 
Figure 3-217 Frequencies of shoot development over time in gibberellic acid treated and untreated pineapple sweet orange trees 

 
Figure 3-318 Lengths and number of leaves of gibberellic acid treated and untreated pineapple sweet orange trees pineapple trees. Black triangles depict the average. Treatments were compared using a Welche’s T-test
 
Figure 3-419 Widths and stem surface area of gibberellic acid treated and untreated pineapple sweet orange trees pineapple trees. Black triangles depict the average. Treatments were compared using a Welche’s T-test
 
Figure 3-520Total foliar area, total number of leaves, and foliar area per leaf of gibberellic acid treated and untreated pineapple sweet orange trees. Red triangles depict the average. Treatments were compared using a Welche’s T-test

 
Figure 3-621 Overall starch content of gibberellic acid treated and untreated, and 2-DDG treated and untreated pineapple sweet orange trees. Red triangles depict the average. Treatments were compared using a Wilcox’s Test
 
Figure 3-722Starch content by leaf age of gibberellic acid treated and untreated, and 2-DDG treated and untreated pineapple sweet orange trees. Red triangles depict the average. Treatments were compared using a Wilcox’s Test
 
Figure 3-823Overall relative titer of CLas genetic material of gibberellic acid treated and untreated, and 2-DDG treated and untreated pineapple sweet orange trees. Red triangles depict the average. Treatments were compared using a Wilcox’s Test
 
Figure 3-924 relative titer of CLas genetic material by leaf age of gibberellic acid treated and untreated, and 2-DDG treated and untreated pineapple sweet orange trees. Red triangles depict the average. Treatments were compared using a Wilcox’s Test
 
Figure 3-1025Overall content of callose in leaf midribs of gibberellic acid treated and untreated, and 2-DDG treated and untreated pineapple sweet orange trees. Red triangles depict the average. Treatments were compared using a Wilcox’s Test
 
Figure 3-1126Overall content of callose in leaf midribs of gibberellic acid treated and untreated, and 2-DDG treated and untreated pineapple sweet orange trees. Red triangles depict the average. Treatments were compared using a Wilcox’s Test
 
Figure 3-12 27Linear regression between content of callose and starch content of of gibberellic acid treated and untreated, and 2-DDG treated and untreated pineapple sweet orange trees.
 

CHAPTER 4
CONCLUDING REMARKS
Throughout this work, we conducted contrasting comparisons between the HLB-tolerant Sugar Belle mandarin and the susceptible pineapple sweet orange. The results generated important evidence supporting three hypothetical complementary mechanisms of tolerance in Sugar Belle: i) an increase in CO2 fixation, a mild reduction in carbohydrate export, and localized callose distribution may explain the higher sucrose concentration reported in the tolerant cultivar; ii) the activation of defense mechanisms through papain-like cysteine proteases (PLCPs) could modulate the immune response of the tolerant cultivar; and iii) the larger relative xylem area and xylem vessel lumen area suggest the contribution of this tissue to HLB tolerance and potentially explain the improved CO2 fixation.
Furthermore, in a separate project focusing on management practices, we investigated the effects of gibberellic acid (GA) application in the susceptible pineapple sweet orange. We demonstrated that GA enhanced the vegetative growth and morphological alterations, such as an increase in stem surface area, which might enhance the photosynthetic capacity of this susceptible cultivar. Similarly to Sugar Belle, the application of GA increased the relative quantity of CLas genetic material in medium leaves. However, further research is needed to fully understand the physiological and pathological implications of this behavior on HLB development, severity, and progression over time.
Additionally, despite utilizing a cheaper and more convenient method for callose quantification in a greater number of samples of leaves of the susceptible pineapple sweet orange, we were unable to successfully demonstrate a reduction in callose midribs following the application of the callose inhibitor 2-Deoxy-D-glucose (2-DDG). We hypothesize that the lack of specificity of the technique to measure callose uniquely in the phloem, as confocal microscopy and image processing can, may have contributed to this result. Nonetheless, the reduction in starch accumulation in old leaves and the positive linear relationship between callose and starch concentrations upon 2-DDG application suggest that changes in carbohydrate accumulation patterns may be occurring in the susceptible pineapple sweet orange following 2-DDG treatments. To obtain more conclusive results, we suggest the use of more accurate callose quantification techniques and improved delivery methods, such as injection, to fully elucidate the effects of 2-DDG in infected plants.
Given the increasing prevalence of HLB in endemic areas worldwide and the absence of commercially available cures or resistant materials, management practices such as tolerant cultivars and the application of substances that reduce HLB impairments represent viable strategies to combat this disease. This thesis has advanced our understanding of the mechanisms underlying the tolerance of Sugar Belle® and has explored new hypotheses and potential improvements for understanding how exogenous applications of callose inhibitors and plant growth regulators can enhance HLB tolerance in susceptible cultivars. These findings serve as a foundation for future research on HLB tolerance and offer valuable insights into the mechanisms induced by management practices in susceptible materials, facilitating the development of an integrated management approach that targets multiple mechanisms to minimize the effects of HLB in susceptible cultivars until resistant materials are developed.
 
LIST OF REFERENCES 
Achor, D., Welker, S., Ben-Mahmoud, S., Wang, C., Folimonova, S. Y., Dutt, M., Gowda, S., & Levy, A. (2020). Dynamics of Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus Movement and Sieve-Pore Plugging in Citrus Sink Cells. Plant Physiology, 182(2), 882–891. https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.19.01391
Albrecht, U., & Bowman, K. D. (2012). Tolerance of trifoliate citrus rootstock hybrids to Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus. Scientia Horticulturae, 147, 71–80. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scienta.2012.08.036
Albrigo, L. G., & Stover, E. W. (2015). Effect of Plant Growth Regulators and Fungicides on Huanglongbing-related Preharvest Fruit Drop of Citrus. HortTechnology, 25(6), 785–790. https://doi.org/10.21273/HORTTECH.25.6.785
Ali, S., Khan, N., & Xie, L. (2020). Molecular and Hormonal Regulation of Leaf Morphogenesis in Arabidopsis. International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 21(14), 5132. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms21145132
Aloni, R. (2021). Phloem and Xylem Differentiation. In Vascular Differentiation and Plant Hormones (pp. 101–130). Springer International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-53202-4_5
Aloni, R., Tollier, M. T., & Monties, B. (1990). The Role of Auxin and Gibberellin in Controlling Lignin Formation in Primary Phloem Fibers and in Xylem of Coleus blumei Stems. Plant Physiology, 94(4), 1743–1747. https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.94.4.1743
Ammar, E.-D., Shatters, R. G., & Hall, D. G. (2011). Localization of Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus, Associated with Citrus Huanglongbing Disease, in its Psyllid Vector using Fluorescence in situ Hybridization. Journal of Phytopathology, 159(11–12), 726–734. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1439-0434.2011.01836.x
Aritua, V., Achor, D., Gmitter, F. G., Albrigo, G., & Wang, N. (2013). Transcriptional and Microscopic Analyses of Citrus Stem and Root Responses to Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus Infection. PLoS ONE, 8(9), e73742. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0073742
Ask The Green Genie. (n.d.). Sugar Belle Mandarins. U.S. Patent PP 21,356. Retrieved May 14, 2023, from https://askthegreengenie.com/fruit-trees/citrus-trees/sugar-belle-mandarins/
Baddeley, A., Rubak, E., & Turner, R. (2015). Spatial point patterns: methodology and applications with R. CRC press.
Bai, J., Baldwin, E., Stover, E., Manthey, J., Plotto, A., Ferrarezi, R., Gmitter, F., & Wang, Y. (2020). Exploring Citrus Hybrids Tolerant to HLB. 2020 Packing House Day. https://irrec.ifas.ufl.edu/postharvest/presentations/2020_Packinghouse_Day/6-Citrus_Hybrids_Tolerant_to_HLB.pdf
Berg, S., Kutra, D., Kroeger, T., Straehle, C. N., Kausler, B. X., Haubold, C., Schiegg, M., Ales, J., Beier, T., Rudy, M., Eren, K., Cervantes, J. I., Xu, B., Beuttenmueller, F., Wolny, A., Zhang, C., Koethe, U., Hamprecht, F. A., & Kreshuk, A. (2019). ilastik: interactive machine learning for (bio)image analysis. Nature Methods, 16(12), 1226–1232. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-019-0582-9
Boava, L. P., Cristofani-Yaly, M., & Machado, M. A. (2017). Physiologic, Anatomic, and Gene Expression Changes in Citrus sunki , Poncirus trifoliata , and Their Hybrids After ‘ Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus’ Infection. Phytopathology®, 107(5), 590–599. https://doi.org/10.1094/PHYTO-02-16-0077-R
Boina, D. R., & Bloomquist, J. R. (2015). Chemical control of the Asian citrus psyllid and of huanglongbing disease in citrus. Pest Management Science, 71(6), 808–823. https://doi.org/10.1002/ps.3957
Bové, J. M. (2006). Huanglongbing: A Destructive, Newly-Emerging, Century-Old Disease Of Citrus. Journal of Plant Pathology, 88(1), 7–37. http://www.jstor.org/stable/41998278
Bowman, K. D., McCollum, G., & Albrecht, U. (2021). SuperSour: A New Strategy for Breeding Superior Citrus Rootstocks. Frontiers in Plant Science, 12. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2021.741009
Braswell, W. E., Park, J.-W., Stansly, P. A., Kostyk, B. C., Louzada, E. S., da Graça, J. V., & Kunta, M. (2020). Root samples provide early and improved detection of Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus in Citrus. Scientific Reports, 10(1), 16982. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-74093-x
Cho, H. T., & Kende, H. (1997). Expression of expansin genes is correlated with growth in deepwater rice. The Plant Cell, 9(9), 1661–1671. https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.9.9.1661
Clark, K., Franco, J. Y., Schwizer, S., Pang, Z., Hawara, E., Liebrand, T. W. H., Pagliaccia, D., Zeng, L., Gurung, F. B., Wang, P., Shi, J., Wang, Y., Ancona, V., van der Hoorn, R. A. L., Wang, N., Coaker, G., & Ma, W. (2018). An effector from the Huanglongbing-associated pathogen targets citrus proteases. Nature Communications, 9(1), 1718. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-04140-9
Clark, K. J., Pang, Z., Trinh, J., Wang, N., & Ma, W. (2020). Sec-Delivered Effector 1 (SDE1) of ‘ Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus’ Promotes Citrus Huanglongbing. Molecular Plant-Microbe Interactions®, 33(12), 1394–1404. https://doi.org/10.1094/MPMI-05-20-0123-R
Couée, I., Sulmon, C., Gouesbet, G., & El Amrani, A. (2006). Involvement of soluble sugars in reactive oxygen species balance and responses to oxidative stress in plants. Journal of Experimental Botany, 57(3), 449–459. https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/erj027
Croxton, S. D., & Stansly, P. A. (2014). Metalized polyethylene mulch to repel Asian citrus psyllid, slow spread of huanglongbing and improve growth of new citrus plantings. Pest Management Science, 70(2), 318–323. https://doi.org/10.1002/ps.3566
Curtolo, M., de Souza Pacheco, I., Boava, L. P., Takita, M. A., Granato, L. M., Galdeano, D. M., de Souza, A. A., Cristofani-Yaly, M., & Machado, M. A. (2020). Wide-ranging transcriptomic analysis of Poncirus trifoliata, Citrus sunki, Citrus sinensis and contrasting hybrids reveals HLB tolerance mechanisms. Scientific Reports, 10(1), 20865. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-77840-2
da Graça, J. V., Douhan, G. W., Halbert, S. E., Keremane, M. L., Lee, R. F., Vidalakis, G., & Zhao, H. (2016). Huanglongbing: An overview of a complex pathosystem ravaging the world’s citrus. Journal of Integrative Plant Biology, 58(4), 373–387. https://doi.org/10.1111/jipb.12437
da Silva, J. R., de Alvarenga, F. V., Boaretto, R. M., Lopes, J. R. S., Quaggio, J. A., Coletta Filho, H. Della, & Mattos, D. (2020). Following the effects of micronutrient supply in HLB-infected trees: plant responses and ‘Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus’ acquisition by the Asian citrus psyllid. Tropical Plant Pathology, 45(6), 597–610. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40858-020-00370-9
Dala-Paula, B. M., Plotto, A., Bai, J., Manthey, J. A., Baldwin, E. A., Ferrarezi, R. S., & Gloria, M. B. A. (2019). Effect of Huanglongbing or Greening Disease on Orange Juice Quality, a Review. Frontiers in Plant Science, 9. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2018.01976
de Andrade, E. C., Girardi, E. A., Stuchi, E. S., Moreira, A. S., Freitas-Astua, J., Fancelli, M., de Brito Silva, S. X., & Laranjeira, F. F. (2021). Citrus Huanglongbing (HLB) and the Brazilian Efforts to Overcome the Disease. Outlooks on Pest Management, 32(5), 189–194. https://doi.org/10.1564/v32_oct_02
De Storme, N., & Geelen, D. (2014). Callose homeostasis at plasmodesmata: molecular regulators and developmental relevance. Frontiers in Plant Science, 5. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2014.00138
Deng, H., Achor, D., Exteberria, E., Yu, Q., Du, D., Stanton, D., Liang, G., & Gmitter Jr., F. G. (2019). Phloem Regeneration Is a Mechanism for Huanglongbing-Tolerance of “Bearss” Lemon and “LB8-9” Sugar Belle® Mandarin. Frontiers in Plant Science, 10. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2019.00277
Deng, H., Zhang, Y., Reuss, L., Suh, J. H., Yu, Q., Liang, G., Wang, Y., & Gmitter, F. G. (2021). Comparative Leaf Volatile Profiles of Two Contrasting Mandarin Cultivars against Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus Infection Illustrate Huanglongbing Tolerance Mechanisms. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 69(37), 10869–10884. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jafc.1c02875
Devaiah, B. N., Madhuvanthi, R., Karthikeyan, A. S., & Raghothama, K. G. (2009). Phosphate Starvation Responses and Gibberellic Acid Biosynthesis are Regulated by the MYB62 Transcription Factor in Arabidopsis. Molecular Plant, 2(1), 43–58. https://doi.org/10.1093/mp/ssn081
Dong, S., & Beckles, D. M. (2019). Dynamic changes in the starch-sugar interconversion within plant source and sink tissues promote a better abiotic stress response. Journal of Plant Physiology, 234–235, 80–93. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jplph.2019.01.007
Dou, H., & Gmitter, F. G. (2007). Postharvest Quality and Acceptance of LB8-9 Mandarin as a New Fresh Fruit Cultivar. HortTechnology, 17(1), 72–77. https://doi.org/10.21273/HORTTECH.17.1.72
Duan, Y., Zhou, L., Hall, D. G., Li, W., Doddapaneni, H., Lin, H., Liu, L., Vahling, C. M., Gabriel, D. W., Williams, K. P., Dickerman, A., Sun, Y., & Gottwald, T. (2009). Complete Genome Sequence of Citrus Huanglongbing Bacterium, ‘ Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus’ Obtained Through Metagenomics. Molecular Plant-Microbe Interactions®, 22(8), 1011–1020. https://doi.org/10.1094/MPMI-22-8-1011
Dutt, M., Barthe, G., Irey, M., & Grosser, J. (2015). Transgenic Citrus Expressing an Arabidopsis NPR1 Gene Exhibit Enhanced Resistance against Huanglongbing (HLB; Citrus Greening). PLOS ONE, 10(9), e0137134. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0137134
Dzikiti, S., Steppe, K., Lemeur, R., & Milford, J. (2007). Whole-tree level water balance and its implications on stomatal oscillations in orange trees [Citrus sinensis (L.) Osbeck] under natural climatic conditions. Journal of Experimental Botany, 58(7), 1893–1901. https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/erm023
Eckardt, N. A. (2007). GA Signaling: Direct Targets of DELLA Proteins. The Plant Cell, 19(10), 2970.1-2970. https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.107.191010
Ed, E., & Cody, N. (2015). ANATOMY OF THE CITRUS LEAF PETIOLE: HEALTHY VS. HUANGLONGBING. Acta Horticulturae, 1065, 891–897. https://doi.org/10.17660/ActaHortic.2015.1065.110
EPPO. (2020). PQR database. Paris, France: European and Mediterranean Plant Protection Organization.
EPPO. (2022). PQR database. Paris, France: European and Mediterranean Plant Protection Organization. https://gd.eppo.int/search?k=candidatus+liberibacter
Fahad, S., Hussain, S., Bano, A., Saud, S., Hassan, S., Shan, D., Khan, F. A., Khan, F., Chen, Y., Wu, C., Tabassum, M. A., Chun, M. X., Afzal, M., Jan, A., Jan, M. T., & Huang, J. (2015). Potential role of phytohormones and plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria in abiotic stresses: consequences for changing environment. Environmental Science and Pollution Research, 22(7), 4907–4921. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-014-3754-2
Fan, G., Xia, Y., Lin, X., Hu, H., Wang, X., Ruan, C., Lu, L., & Liu, B. (2016). Evaluation of thermotherapy against Huanglongbing (citrus greening) in the greenhouse. Journal of Integrative Agriculture, 15(1), 111–119. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2095-3119(15)61085-1
Fan, J., Chen, C., Brlansky, R. H., Gmitter Jr., F. G., & Li, Z.-G. (2010). Changes in carbohydrate metabolism in Citrus sinensis infected with ‘Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus.’ Plant Pathology, 59(6), 1037–1043. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-3059.2010.02328.x
Fan, Jing, Chen, C., Achor, D. S., Brlansky, R. H., Li, Z.-G., & Gmitter, F. G. (2013). Differential anatomical responses of tolerant and susceptible citrus species to the infection of ‘Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus.’ Physiological and Molecular Plant Pathology, 83, 69–74. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pmpp.2013.05.002
Fan, Jing, Chen, C., Yu, Q., Khalaf, A., Achor, D. S., Brlansky, R. H., Moore, G. A., Li, Z.-G., & Gmitter, F. G. (2012). Comparative Transcriptional and Anatomical Analyses of Tolerant Rough Lemon and Susceptible Sweet Orange in Response to ‘ Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus’ Infection. Molecular Plant-Microbe Interactions®, 25(11), 1396–1407. https://doi.org/10.1094/MPMI-06-12-0150-R
Ferrarezi, R. S., Qureshi, J. A., Wright, A. L., Ritenour, M. A., & Macan, N. P. F. (2019). Citrus Production Under Screen as a Strategy to Protect Grapefruit Trees From Huanglongbing Disease. Frontiers in Plant Science, 10. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2019.01598
Filho, A. B., Inoue-Nagata, A. K., Bassanezi, R. B., Belasque, J., Amorim, L., Macedo, M. A., Barbosa, J. C., Willocquet, L., & Savary, S. (2016). The importance of primary inoculum and area-wide disease management to crop health and food security. Food Security, 8(1), 221–238. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12571-015-0544-8
Folimonova, S. Y., Robertson, C. J., Garnsey, S. M., Gowda, S., & Dawson, W. O. (2009). Examination of the Responses of Different Genotypes of Citrus to Huanglongbing (Citrus Greening) Under Different Conditions. Phytopathology®, 99(12), 1346–1354. https://doi.org/10.1094/PHYTO-99-12-1346
Fruitnet. (2009). Mexico reports first HLB discovery. https://www.fruitnet.com/eurofruit/mexico-reports-first-hlb-discovery/4208.article
Gabriel, D., Gottwald, T. R., Lopes, S. A., & Wulff, N. A. (2020). Bacterial pathogens of citrus: Citrus canker, citrus variegated chlorosis and Huanglongbing. In The Genus Citrus (pp. 371–389). Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-812163-4.00018-8
Galdeano, D. M., Pacheco, I. D. S., Alves, G. R., Granato, L. M., Rashidi, M., Turner, D., Levy, A., & Machado, M. A. (2020). Friend or foe ? Relationship between ‘ Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus ’ and Diaphorina citri. Tropical Plant Pathology, 2020(45), 559–571. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1007/s40858-020-00375-4
Gao, Y., Xu, J., Li, Z., Zhang, Y., Riera, N., Xiong, Z., Ouyang, Z., Liu, X., Lu, Z., Seymour, D., Zhong, B., & Wang, N. (2023). Citrus genomic resources unravel putative genetic determinants of Huanglongbing pathogenicity. IScience, 26(2), 106024. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2023.106024
Garcia-Ruiz, H., Szurek, B., & Van den Ackerveken, G. (2021). Stop helping pathogens: engineering plant susceptibility genes for durable resistance. Current Opinion in Biotechnology, 70, 187–195. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.copbio.2021.05.005
Garmendia, A., Beltrán, R., Zornoza, C., García-Breijo, F. J., Reig, J., & Merle, H. (2019). Gibberellic acid in Citrus spp. flowering and fruiting: A systematic review. PLOS ONE, 14(9), e0223147. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0223147
Gasparoto, M. C. de G., Primiano, I. V., Bassanezi, R. B., Lourenço, S. A., Montesino, L. H., Wulff, N. A., Martins, E. C., Filho, A. B., & Amorim, L. (2022). Prevalent Transmission of ‘Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus’ over ‘ Ca . Liberibacter americanus’ in a Long-Term Controlled Environment. Phytopathology®, 112(1), 180–188. https://doi.org/10.1094/PHYTO-06-21-0239-FI
George, J., Kanissery, R., Bashyal, M., Tamayo, B., & Stelinski, L. L. (2022). Survival and Feeding Behavior of Diaphorina citri (Hemiptera: Liviidae) Adults on Common Cover Crops in Citrus. Agriculture, 12(12), 2175. https://doi.org/10.3390/agriculture12122175
Godson, A., & van der Hoorn, R. A. L. (2021). The front line of defence: a meta-analysis of apoplastic proteases in plant immunity. Journal of Experimental Botany, 72(9), 3381–3394. https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/eraa602
Gómez-Ariza, J., Campo, S., Rufat, M., Estopà, M., Messeguer, J., Segundo, B. S., & Coca, M. (2007). Sucrose-Mediated Priming of Plant Defense Responses and Broad-Spectrum Disease Resistance by Overexpression of the Maize Pathogenesis-Related PRms Protein in Rice Plants. Molecular Plant-Microbe Interactions®, 20(7), 832–842. https://doi.org/10.1094/MPMI-20-7-0832
Gottwald, T. R. (2010). Current Epidemiological Understanding of Citrus Huanglongbing. Annual Review of Phytopathology, 48(1), 119–139. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-phyto-073009-114418
Graham, J., Gottwald, T., & Setamou, M. (2020). Status of Huanglongbing (HLB) outbreaks in Florida, California and Texas. Tropical Plant Pathology, 45(3), 265–278. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40858-020-00335-y
Guardiola, J. L., Monerri, C., & Agusti, M. (1982). The inhibitory effect of gibberellic acid on flowering in Citrus. Physiologia Plantarum, 55(2), 136–142. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1399-3054.1982.tb02276.x
Gupta, R., & Chakrabarty, S. K. (2013). Gibberellic acid in plant. Plant Signaling & Behavior, 8(9), e25504. https://doi.org/10.4161/psb.25504
Hamido, S. A., Ebel, R. C., & Morgan, K. T. (2019). Interaction of Huanglongbing and Foliar Applications of Copper on Water Relations of Citrus sinensis cv. Valencia. Plants, 8(9), 298. https://doi.org/10.3390/plants8090298
Hilf, M. E., & Luo, W. (2020). Inoculation Period and Citrus Host Effect Establishment of New Infections of ‘ Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus’ Transmitted via Vegetative Grafting. Plant Disease, 104(7), 1894–1899. https://doi.org/10.1094/PDIS-09-19-2022-RE
Hu, B., Rao, M. J., Deng, X., Pandey, S. S., Hendrich, C., Ding, F., Wang, N., & Xu, Q. (2021). Molecular signatures between citrus and Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus. PLOS Pathogens, 17(12), e1010071. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1010071
Hu, W., Lu, Z., Meng, F., Li, X., Cong, R., Ren, T., Sharkey, T. D., & Lu, J. (2020). The reduction in leaf area precedes that in photosynthesis under potassium deficiency: the importance of leaf anatomy. New Phytologist, 227(6), 1749–1763. https://doi.org/10.1111/nph.16644
Huang, X., Wang, Y., & Wang, N. (2022). Highly Efficient Generation of Canker-Resistant Sweet Orange Enabled by an Improved CRISPR/Cas9 System. Frontiers in Plant Science, 12. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2021.769907
Humphrey, C. D., & Pittman, F. E. (1974). A simple methylene blue-azure II-basic fuchsin stain for epoxy-embedded tissue sections. Stain Technology, 49(1), 9–14.
Hussain, S., Rao, M. J., Anjum, M. A., Ejaz, S., Umar, U.-D., Ali, M. A., Khalid, M. F., Sohail, M., Ercisli, S., Zia-Ul-Haq, M., Ahmad, S., & Naqvi, S. A. H. (2019). Effect of different combinations of antibiotics on fruit quality and antioxidant defense system in Huanglongbing infected Kinnow orchards. AMB Express, 9(1), 147. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13568-019-0871-9
Jaffe, M. J., & Goren, R. (1988). Deposition of callose in relation to abscission of citrus leaves. Physiologia Plantarum, 72(2), 329–336. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1399-3054.1988.tb05841.x
Jia, H., Omar, A. A., Orbović, V., & Wang, N. (2022). Biallelic Editing of the LOB1 Promoter via CRISPR/Cas9 Creates Canker-Resistant ‘Duncan’ Grapefruit. Phytopathology®, 112(2), 308–314. https://doi.org/10.1094/PHYTO-04-21-0144-R
Jia, H., Wang, Y., Su, H., Huang, X., & Wang, N. (2022). LbCas12a-D156R Efficiently Edits LOB1 Effector Binding Elements to Generate Canker-Resistant Citrus Plants. Cells, 11(3), 315. https://doi.org/10.3390/cells11030315
Johnson, E. G., Wu, J., Bright, D. B., & Graham, J. H. (2014). Association of ‘ Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus’ root infection, but not phloem plugging with root loss on huanglongbing-affected trees prior to appearance of foliar symptoms. Plant Pathology, 63(2), 290–298. https://doi.org/10.1111/ppa.12109
Jones, S. E., & Killiny, N. (2021). Influence of Rootstock on the Leaf Volatile Organic Compounds of Citrus Scion Is More Pronounced after the Infestation with Diaphorina citri. Plants, 10(11), 2422. https://doi.org/10.3390/plants10112422
Kalev, N., & Aloni, R. (1998). Role of auxin and gibberellin in regenerative differentiation of tracheids in Pinus pinea seedlings. New Phytologist, 138(3), 461–468. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1469-8137.1998.00119.x
Kalve, S., De Vos, D., & Beemster, G. T. S. (2014). Leaf development: a cellular perspective. Frontiers in Plant Science, 5. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2014.00362
Kassambara, A. (2020). ggpubr: “ggplot2” Based Publication Ready Plots. R package version 0.4.0. https://cran.r-project.org/package=ggpubr
Keeley, M., Rowland, D., & Vincent, C. (2022). Citrus photosynthesis and morphology acclimate to phloem‐affecting huanglongbing disease at the leaf and shoot levels. Physiologia Plantarum, 174(2). https://doi.org/10.1111/ppl.13662
Keremane, M. L., McCollum, T. G., Roose, M. L., Lee, R. F., & Ramadugu, C. (2021). An Improved Reference Gene for Detection of “Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus” Associated with Citrus Huanglongbing by qPCR and Digital Droplet PCR Assays. Plants, 10(10), 2111. https://doi.org/10.3390/plants10102111
Keunen, E., Peshev, D., Vangronsveld, J., Van Den Ende, W., & Cuypers, A. (2013). Plant sugars are crucial players in the oxidative challenge during abiotic stress: extending the traditional concept. Plant, Cell & Environment, 36(7), 1242–1255. https://doi.org/10.1111/pce.12061
Killiny, N. (2022). Made for Each Other: Vector–Pathogen Interfaces in the Huanglongbing Pathosystem. Phytopathology®, 112(1), 26–43. https://doi.org/10.1094/PHYTO-05-21-0182-FI
Killiny, N., Jones, S. E., Nehela, Y., Hijaz, F., Dutt, M., Gmitter, F. G., & Grosser, J. W. (2018). All roads lead to Rome: Towards understanding different avenues of tolerance to huanglongbing in citrus cultivars. Plant Physiology and Biochemistry, 129, 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plaphy.2018.05.005
Killiny, N., Valim, M. F., Jones, S. E., Omar, A. A., Hijaz, F., Gmitter, F. G., & Grosser, J. W. (2017). Metabolically speaking: Possible reasons behind the tolerance of ‘Sugar Belle’ mandarin hybrid to huanglongbing. Plant Physiology and Biochemistry, 116, 36–47. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plaphy.2017.05.001
Kim, J.-S., Sagaram, U. S., Burns, J. K., Li, J.-L., & Wang, N. (2009). Response of Sweet Orange ( Citrus sinensis ) to ‘ Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus’ Infection: Microscopy and Microarray Analyses. Phytopathology®, 99(1), 50–57. https://doi.org/10.1094/PHYTO-99-1-0050
Koh, E.-J., Zhou, L., Williams, D. S., Park, J., Ding, N., Duan, Y.-P., & Kang, B.-H. (2012). Callose deposition in the phloem plasmodesmata and inhibition of phloem transport in citrus leaves infected with “Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus.” Protoplasma, 249(3), 687–697. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00709-011-0312-3
Kohler, A., Schwindling, S., & Conrath, U. (2000). Extraction and quantitative determination of callose from Arabidopsis leaves. Biotechniques, 28(6), 1084–1086.
Kumar, S. R., Gopal, K., Rajasekharam, T., Ruth, C., Balakrishna, M., Gopi, V., & Gowri, T. (2022). Application of chemicals and nutrients differs in bacterial titre of Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus on infected Citrus sinensis (L.) Osbeck. The Pharma Innovation, 11(8), 135–144. https://doi.org/10.22271/tpi.2022.v11.i8b.14978
Kwakye, S., & Kadyampakeni, D. M. (2022). Micronutrients Improve Growth and Development of HLB-Affected Citrus Trees in Florida. Plants, 12(1), 73. https://doi.org/10.3390/plants12010073
Levy, A., Erlanger, M., Rosenthal, M., & Epel, B. L. (2007). A plasmodesmata-associated b -1 , 3-glucanase in Arabidopsis. 669–682. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-313X.2006.02986.x
Levy, A., Livingston, T., Wang, C., Achor, D., & Vashisth, T. (2023). Canopy Density, but Not Bacterial Titers, Predicts Fruit Yield in Huanglongbing-Affected Sweet Orange Trees. Plants, 12(2), 290. https://doi.org/10.3390/plants12020290
Li, J., Trivedi, P., & Wang, N. (2016). Field Evaluation of Plant Defense Inducers for the Control of Citrus Huanglongbing. Phytopathology®, 106(1), 37–46. https://doi.org/10.1094/PHYTO-08-15-0196-R
Li, M., & Nangong, Z. (2021). Precision trunk injection technology for treatment of huanglongbing (HLB)-affected citrus trees—a review. Journal of Plant Diseases and Protection. https://doi.org/10.1007/s41348-021-00510-6
Li, Sheng‐yang, & Vincent, C. (2022). Root:shoot balance controls flush phenology and carbohydrate translocation dynamics in citrus ( Citrus x sinensis ) trunk. Physiologia Plantarum, 174(1). https://doi.org/10.1111/ppl.13601
Li, Sheng, Wu, F., Duan, Y., Singerman, A., & Guan, Z. (2020). Citrus Greening: Management Strategies and Their Economic Impact. HortScience, 55(5), 604–612. https://doi.org/10.21273/HORTSCI14696-19
Li, Y., He, P., Ahmed, A., Liu, Y., Ahmed, W., Wu, Y., He, Y., He, P., & Munir, S. (2023). Endophyte mediated restoration of citrus microbiome and modulation of host defense genes against Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus. PREPRINT (Version 1) Available at Research Square [Https://Doi.Org/10.21203/Rs.3.Rs-2863977/V1].
Lin, H., Pietersen, G., Han, C., Read, D. A., Lou, B., Gupta, G., & Civerolo, E. L. (2015). Complete Genome Sequence of “ Candidatus Liberibacter africanus,” a Bacterium Associated with Citrus Huanglongbing. Genome Announcements, 3(4). https://doi.org/10.1128/genomeA.00733-15
Liu, K., He, J., Guan, Z., Zhong, M., Pang, R., & Han, Q. (2021). Transcriptomic and Metabolomic Analyses of Diaphorina citri Kuwayama Infected and Non-infected With Candidatus Liberibacter Asiaticus. Frontiers in Physiology, 11. https://doi.org/10.3389/fphys.2020.630037
Liu, Y.-H., Song, Y.-H., & Ruan, Y.-L. (2022). Sugar conundrum in plant–pathogen interactions: roles of invertase and sugar transporters depend on pathosystems. Journal of Experimental Botany, 73(7), 1910–1925. https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/erab562
Liu, Y., Vasina, V. V., Kraner, M. E., Peters, W. S., Sonnewald, U., & Knoblauch, M. (2022). Proteomics of isolated sieve tubes from Nicotiana tabacum : sieve element–specific proteins reveal differentiation of the endomembrane system. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 119(1). https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2112755119
Livak, K. J., & Schmittgen, T. D. (2001). Analysis of Relative Gene Expression Data Using Real-Time Quantitative PCR and the 2−ΔΔCT Method. Methods, 25(4), 402–408. https://doi.org/10.1006/meth.2001.1262
Llorens, E., Fernández-Crespo, E., Vicedo, B., Lapeña, L., & García-Agustín, P. (2013). Enhancement of the citrus immune system provides effective resistance against Alternaria brown spot disease. Journal of Plant Physiology, 170(2), 146–154. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jplph.2012.09.018
Lopes, S. A., Frare, G. F., Bertolini, E., Cambra, M., Fernandes, N. G., Ayres, A. J., Marin, D. R., & Bové, J. M. (2009). Liberibacters Associated with Citrus Huanglongbing in Brazil: ‘ Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus’ Is Heat Tolerant, ‘ Ca. L. americanus’ Is Heat Sensitive. Plant Disease, 93(3), 257–262. https://doi.org/10.1094/PDIS-93-3-0257
Lopez, J. A., & Durborow, S. L. (2014). Huanglongbing and the California citrus industry: A cost comparison of do nothing vs. do something management practices. Texas Journal of Agriculture and Natural Resources, 27, 51–68.
Ma, W., Pang, Z., Huang, X., Xu, J., Pandey, S. S., Li, J., Achor, D. S., Vasconcelos, F. N. C., Hendrich, C., Huang, Y., Wang, W., Lee, D., Stanton, D., & Wang, N. (2022). Citrus Huanglongbing is a pathogen-triggered immune disease that can be mitigated with antioxidants and gibberellin. Nature Communications, 13(1), 529. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-28189-9
Marth, P. C., Audia, W. V., & Mitchell, J. W. (1956). Effects of Gibberellic Acid on Growth and Development of Plants of Various Genera and Species. Botanical Gazette, 118(2), 106–111. https://doi.org/10.1086/335932
McCollum, G., Hilf, M., Irey, M., Luo, W., & Gottwald, T. (2016). Susceptibility of Sixteen Citrus Genotypes to ‘ Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus.’ Plant Disease, 100(6), 1080–1086. https://doi.org/10.1094/PDIS-08-15-0940-RE
Mehouachi, J., Tadeo, F. R., Zaragoza, S., Primo-Millo, E., & Talon, M. (1996). Effects of gibberellic acid and paclobutrazol on growth and carbohydrate accumulation in shoots and roots of citrus rootstock seedlings. Journal of Horticultural Science, 71(5), 747–754. https://doi.org/10.1080/14620316.1996.11515455
Merfa, M. V., Pérez-López, E., Naranjo, E., Jain, M., Gabriel, D. W., & De La Fuente, L. (2019). Progress and Obstacles in Culturing ‘ Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus’, the Bacterium Associated with Huanglongbing. Phytopathology®, 109(7), 1092–1101. https://doi.org/10.1094/PHYTO-02-19-0051-RVW
Misas‐Villamil, J. C., Hoorn, R. A. L., & Doehlemann, G. (2016). Papain‐like cysteine proteases as hubs in plant immunity. New Phytologist, 212(4), 902–907. https://doi.org/10.1111/nph.14117
Mukhtar, M. S., Nishimura, M. T., & Dangl, J. (2009). NPR1 in Plant Defense: It’s Not over ’til It’s Turned over. Cell, 137(5), 804–806. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2009.05.010
Munir, S., Ahmed, A., Li, Y., He, P., Singh, B. K., He, P., Li, X., Asad, S., Wu, Y., & He, Y. (2021). The hidden treasures of citrus: finding Huanglongbing cure where it was lost. Critical Reviews in Biotechnology, 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1080/07388551.2021.1942780
Muñoz-Fambuena, N., Mesejo, C., González-Mas, M. C., Iglesias, D. J., Primo-Millo, E., & Agustí, M. (2012). Gibberellic Acid Reduces Flowering Intensity in Sweet Orange [Citrus sinensis (L.) Osbeck] by Repressing CiFT Gene Expression. Journal of Plant Growth Regulation, 31(4), 529–536. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00344-012-9263-y
Murillo, I., Roca, R., Bortolotti, C., & Segundo, B. S. (2003). Engineering photoassimilate partitioning in tobacco plants improves growth and productivity and provides pathogen resistance. The Plant Journal, 36(3), 330–341. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-313X.2003.01880.x
Nagai, K., Mori, Y., Ishikawa, S., Furuta, T., Gamuyao, R., Niimi, Y., Hobo, T., Fukuda, M., Kojima, M., Takebayashi, Y., Fukushima, A., Himuro, Y., Kobayashi, M., Ackley, W., Hisano, H., Sato, K., Yoshida, A., Wu, J., Sakakibara, H., … Ashikari, M. (2020). Antagonistic regulation of the gibberellic acid response during stem growth in rice. Nature, 584(7819), 109–114. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2501-8
Nardini, A., Salleo, S., & Jansen, S. (2011). More than just a vulnerable pipeline: xylem physiology in the light of ion-mediated regulation of plant water transport. Journal of Experimental Botany, 62(14), 4701–4718. https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/err208
Neff, E. (2022). Best Bets for HLB-Tolerant Citrus. Citrus Industry AgNet. https://citrusindustry.net/2022/10/19/best-bets-for-hlb-tolerant-citrus/
Nehela, Y., & Killiny, N. (2020). Revisiting the Complex Pathosystem of Huanglongbing: Deciphering the Role of Citrus Metabolites in Symptom Development. Metabolites, 10(10), 409. https://doi.org/10.3390/metabo10100409
Niño, M. C., Kang, K. K., & Cho, Y.-G. (2020). Genome-wide transcriptional response of papain-like cysteine protease-mediated resistance against Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae in rice. Plant Cell Reports, 39(4), 457–472. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00299-019-02502-1
Orlovskis, Z., Canale, M. C., Thole, V., Pecher, P., Lopes, J. R., & Hogenhout, S. A. (2015). Insect-borne plant pathogenic bacteria: getting a ride goes beyond physical contact. Current Opinion in Insect Science, 9, 16–23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cois.2015.04.007
Pandey, S. S., Hendrich, C., Andrade, M. O., & Wang, N. (2022). Candidatus Liberibacter: From Movement, Host Responses, to Symptom Development of Citrus Huanglongbing. Phytopathology®, 112(1), 55–68. https://doi.org/10.1094/PHYTO-08-21-0354-FI
Pietersen, G., Viljoen, R., & Phahladira, M. N. B. (2010). BACKGROUND, CURRENT SITUATION AND MANAGEMENT OF HLB AND ITS VECTOR IN SOUTH AFRICA. II Taller Internacional Sobre El Huanglongbing y El Psílido Asiático de Los Cítricos. Mérida.(CD).
Qiu, W., Soares, J., Pang, Z., Huang, Y., Sun, Z., Wang, N., Grosser, J., & Dutt, M. (2020). Potential Mechanisms of AtNPR1 Mediated Resistance against Huanglongbing (HLB) in Citrus. International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 21(6), 2009. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms21062009
R Core Team. (2022). R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. In R Foundation for Statistical Computing. https://www.r-project.org/
Ramadugu, C., Keremane, M. L., Halbert, S. E., Duan, Y. P., Roose, M. L., Stover, E., & Lee, R. F. (2016). Long-Term Field Evaluation Reveals Huanglongbing Resistance in Citrus Relatives. Plant Disease, 100(9), 1858–1869. https://doi.org/10.1094/PDIS-03-16-0271-RE
Rattner, R. J., Godfrey, K. E., Hajeri, S., & Yokomi, R. K. (2022). An Improved Recombinase Polymerase Amplification Coupled with Lateral Flow Assay for Rapid Field Detection of ‘ Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus.’ Plant Disease, 106(12), 3091–3099. https://doi.org/10.1094/PDIS-09-21-2098-RE
Ribeiro, C., Xu, J., Hendrich, C., Pandey, S. S., Yu, Q., Gmitter, F. G., & Wang, N. (2023). Seasonal Transcriptome Profiling of Susceptible and Tolerant Citrus Cultivars to Citrus Huanglongbing. Phytopathology®, 113(2), 286–298. https://doi.org/10.1094/PHYTO-05-22-0179-R
Robertson, C. J., Zhang, X., Gowda, S., Orbović, V., Dawson, W. O., & Mou, Z. (2018). Overexpression of the Arabidopsis NPR1 protein in citrus confers tolerance to Huanglongbing. Journal of Citrus Pathology, 5(1). https://doi.org/10.5070/C451038911
Robinson, A. (2020). Progress Toward HLB-Tolerant Citrus. Citrus Industry AgNet. https://citrusindustry.net/2020/10/05/progress-toward-hlb-tolerant-citrus/
Rodríguez-Gamir, J., Intrigliolo, D. S., Primo-Millo, E., & Forner-Giner, M. A. (2010). Relationships between xylem anatomy, root hydraulic conductivity, leaf/root ratio and transpiration in citrus trees on different rootstocks. Physiologia Plantarum, 139(2), 159–169. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1399-3054.2010.01351.x
Rojas, C. M., Senthil-Kumar, M., Tzin, V., & Mysore, K. S. (2014). Regulation of primary plant metabolism during plant-pathogen interactions and its contribution to plant defense. Frontiers in Plant Science, 5. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2014.00017
Rokaya, P. R., Baral, D. R., Gautam, D. M., Shrestha, A. K., & Paudyal, K. P. (2016). Effect of Pre-Harvest Application of Gibberellic Acid on Fruit Quality and Shelf Life of Mandarin (&amp;lt;i&amp;gt;Citrus reticulata&amp;lt;/i&amp;gt; Blanco). American Journal of Plant Sciences, 07(07), 1033–1039. https://doi.org/10.4236/ajps.2016.77098
Roldán, E. L., Stelinski, L. L., & Pelz-Stelinski, K. S. (2023). Foliar Antibiotic Treatment Reduces Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus Acquisition by the Asian Citrus Psyllid, Diaphorina citri (Hemiptera: Liviidae), but Does not Reduce Tree Infection Rate. Journal of Economic Entomology, 116(1), 78–89. https://doi.org/10.1093/jee/toac200
Salcedo, D., Mora, G., Covarrubias, I., Cintora, C., Hinojosa, R., DePaolis, F., & Mora, S. (2011). Assessment of the Economic Impact of Huanglongbing (HLB) disease on Mexico’s Citrus Chain. Comuniica Magazine, 2011(936-2016–74321).
Schaffer, A. A., Liu, K.-C., Goldschmidt, E. E., Boyer, C. D., & Goren, R. (1986). Citrus Leaf Chlorosis Induced by Sink Removal: Starch, Nitrogen, and Chloroplast Ultrastructure. Journal of Plant Physiology, 124(1–2), 111–121. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0176-1617(86)80183-3
Schaller, G. E., Bishopp, A., & Kieber, J. J. (2015). The Yin-Yang of Hormones: Cytokinin and Auxin Interactions in Plant Development. The Plant Cell, 27(1), 44–63. https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.114.133595
Schindelin, J., Arganda-Carreras, I., Frise, E., Kaynig, V., Longair, M., Pietzsch, T., Preibisch, S., Rueden, C., Saalfeld, S., Schmid, B., Tinevez, J.-Y., White, D. J., Hartenstein, V., Eliceiri, K., Tomancak, P., & Cardona, A. (2012). Fiji: an open-source platform for biological-image analysis. Nature Methods, 9(7), 676–682. https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.2019
Shen, W., Cevallos-Cevallos, J. M., Nunes da Rocha, U., Arevalo, H. A., Stansly, P. A., Roberts, P. D., & van Bruggen, A. H. C. (2013). Relation between plant nutrition, hormones, insecticide applications, bacterial endophytes, and Candidatus Liberibacter Ct values in citrus trees infected with Huanglongbing. European Journal of Plant Pathology, 137(4), 727–742. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10658-013-0283-7
Singerman, A., & Futch, S. H. (2018). Impact of Citrus Greening on Citrus Operations in Florida. University of Florida IFAS Extension. https://edis.ifas.ufl.edu/fe983
Singerman, A., Lence, S. H., & Useche, P. (2017). Is Area‐Wide Pest Management Useful? The Case of Citrus Greening. Applied Economic Perspectives and Policy, 39(4), 609–634. https://doi.org/10.1093/aepp/ppx030
Singerman, Ariel, & Rogers, M. E. (2020). The Economic Challenges of Dealing with Citrus Greening: The Case of Florida. Journal of Integrated Pest Management, 11(1). https://doi.org/10.1093/jipm/pmz037
Singh, S., Livingston, T., Tang, L., & Vashisth, T. (2022). Effects of Exogenous Gibberellic Acid in Huanglongbing-affected Sweet Orange Trees under Florida Conditions—II. Fruit Production and Tree Health. HortScience, 57(3), 353–359. https://doi.org/10.21273/HORTSCI16277-21
Soares, J. M., Weber, K. C., Qiu, W., Mahmoud, L. M., Grosser, J. W., & Dutt, M. (2022). Overexpression of the salicylic acid binding protein 2 (SABP2) from tobacco enhances tolerance against Huanglongbing in transgenic citrus. Plant Cell Reports, 41(12), 2305–2320. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00299-022-02922-6
Spreen, T. H., Baldwin, J.-P., & Futch, S. H. (2014). An Economic Assessment of the Impact of Huanglongbing on Citrus Tree Plantings in Florida. HortScience, 49(8), 1052–1055. https://doi.org/10.21273/HORTSCI.49.8.1052
Stover, E., Grafton-Cardwell, E., Lemaux, P. G., & Garcia-Figuera., S. (2017). Progress toward HLB-tolerant citrus from conventional plant breeding. Science for Citrus Health, University of California Agriculture and Natural Resources. https://ucanr.edu/sites/scienceforcitrushealth/Research_Snapshots/Disease_Management/Stover/
Stover, E., Inch, S., Richardson, M. L., & Hall, D. G. (2016). Conventional Citrus of Some Scion/Rootstock Combinations Show Field Tolerance under High Huanglongbing Disease Pressure. HortScience, 51(2), 127–132. https://doi.org/10.21273/HORTSCI.51.2.127
Stover, E., & McCollum, G. (2011). Incidence and Severity of Huanglongbing and Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus Titer among Field-infected Citrus Cultivars. HortScience, 46(10), 1344–1348. https://doi.org/10.21273/HORTSCI.46.10.1344
Suh, J. H., Guha, A., Wang, Z., Li, S., Killiny, N., Vincent, C., & Wang, Y. (2021). Metabolomic analysis elucidates how shade conditions ameliorate the deleterious effects of greening (Huanglongbing) disease in citrus. The Plant Journal, 108(6), 1798–1814. https://doi.org/10.1111/tpj.15546
Sun, L., Nasrullah, Ke, F., Nie, Z., Wang, P., & Xu, J. (2019). Citrus Genetic Engineering for Disease Resistance: Past, Present and Future. International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 20(21), 5256. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms20215256
Takushi, T., Toyozato, T., Kawano, S., Taba, S., Taba, K., Ooshiro, A., Numazawa, M., & Tokeshi, M. (2007). Scratch method for simple, rapid diagnosis of citrus huanglongbing using iodine to detect high accumulation of starch in the citrus leaves. Japanese Journal of Phytopathology (Japan).
Talat, H., Shafqat, W., & Qureshi, M. A. (2020). EFFECT OF GIBBERELLIC ACID ON FRUIT QUALITY OF KINNOW MANDARIN. Journal of Global Innovations in Agricultural and Social Sciences, 8(3), 59–63. https://doi.org/10.22194/JGIASS/8.901
Tang, L., Singh, G., Dewdney, M., & Vashisth, T. (2021). Effects of Exogenous Gibberellic Acid in Huanglongbing-affected Sweet Orange Trees under Florida Conditions – I. Flower Bud Emergence and Flower Formation. HortScience, 56(12), 1531–1541. https://doi.org/10.21273/HORTSCI16080-21
Tang, L., & Vashisth, T. (2020). New insight in Huanglongbing-associated mature fruit drop in citrus and its link to oxidative stress. Scientia Horticulturae, 265, 109246. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scienta.2020.109246
Thapa, S. P., De Francesco, A., Trinh, J., Gurung, F. B., Pang, Z., Vidalakis, G., Wang, N., Ancona, V., Ma, W., & Coaker, G. (2020). Genome‐wide analyses of Liberibacter species provides insights into evolution, phylogenetic relationships, and virulence factors. Molecular Plant Pathology, 21(5), 716–731. https://doi.org/10.1111/mpp.12925
Tokunaga, N., Uchimura, N., & Sato, Y. (2006). Involvement of gibberellin in tracheary element differentiation and lignification in Zinnia elegans xylogenic culture. Protoplasma, 228(4), 179–187. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00709-006-0180-4
Tyree, M. T., & Ewers, F. W. (1991). The hydraulic architecture of trees and other woody plants. New Phytologist, 119(3), 345–360. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8137.1991.tb00035.x
Tyree, M. T., & Zimmermann, M. H. (2013). Xylem structure and the ascent of sap. Springer Science & Business Media.
University of Florida. (2021). Sugar Belle Mandarin: A Great Choice for the Florida Panhandle. UF/IFAS Extension. https://nwdistrict.ifas.ufl.edu/hort/2021/11/22/sugar-belle-mandarin-a-great-choice-for-the-florida-panhandle/
USDA. (2022). Citrus Greening. https://www.aphis.usda.gov/aphis/ourfocus/planthealth/plant-pest-and-disease-programs/pests-and-diseases/citrus/citrus-greening
Vashisth, T. (2021). Gibberellic Acid Use: Considerations and Concerns. Citrus Industry Magazine. https://citrusindustry.net/2021/10/05/gibberellic-acid-use-considerations-and-concerns/
Verma, D. P. S., & Hong, Z. (2001). Plant callose synthase complexes. Plant Molecular Biology, 47, 693–701.
Villanueva, R. A. M., & Chen, Z. J. (2019). ggplot2: elegant graphics for data analysis. Taylor & Francis.
Vincent, C., Guha, A., Killiny, N., & Diepenbrock, L. (2021). Understory environment promotes photosynthetic efficiency and mitigates severity and function of an introduced, vectored pathosystem: a study of a feral citrus population in central Florida. Trees, 35(5), 1711–1725. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00468-021-02147-2
Vincent, C., Minchin, P. E. H., & Liesche, J. (2019). Noninvasive Determination of Phloem Transport Speed with Carbon-14 (14C). In J. Liesche (Ed.), Phloem: methods and protocols (pp. 153–162). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-9562-2_13
Viteri, D. M., Estévez de Jensen, C., & Hernández, E. (2021). Response of Citrus spp. germplasm from Puerto Rico grafted on two rootstocks to early infection of huanglongbing. European Journal of Plant Pathology, 160(3), 589–597. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10658-021-02267-y
Wang, B., Andargie, M., & Fang, R. (2022). The function and biosynthesis of callose in high plants. Heliyon, 8(4), e09248. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2022.e09248
Wang, N. (2021). A promising plant defense peptide against citrus Huanglongbing disease. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 118(6). https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2026483118
Wang, N., Pierson, E. A., Setubal, J. C., Xu, J., Levy, J. G., Zhang, Y., Li, J., Rangel, L. T., & Martins, J. (2017). The Candidatus Liberibacter–Host Interface: Insights into Pathogenesis Mechanisms and Disease Control. Annual Review of Phytopathology, 55(1), 451–482. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-phyto-080516-035513
Wang, N., & Trivedi, P. (2013). Citrus Huanglongbing: A Newly Relevant Disease Presents Unprecedented Challenges. Phytopathology®, 103(7), 652–665. https://doi.org/10.1094/PHYTO-12-12-0331-RVW
Wang, Z., Yin, Y., Hu, H., Yuan, Q., Peng, G., & Xia, Y. (2006). Development and application of molecular-based diagnosis for “Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus”, the causal pathogen of citrus huanglongbing. Plant Pathology, 55(5), 630–638. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-3059.2006.01438.x
Welker, S., & Levy, A. (2022). Comparing Machine Learning and Binary Thresholding Methods for Quantification of Callose Deposits in the Citrus Phloem. In Plants (Vol. 11, Issue 5). https://doi.org/10.3390/plants11050624
Welker, S., Pierre, M., Santiago, J. P., Dutt, M., Vincent, C., & Levy, A. (2021). Phloem transport limitation in Huanglongbing-affected sweet orange is dependent on phloem-limited bacteria and callose. In D. Epron (Ed.), Tree Physiology. https://doi.org/10.1093/treephys/tpab134
Welker, S., Pierre, M., Santiago, J. P., Dutt, M., Vincent, C., & Levy, A. (2022). Phloem transport limitation in Huanglongbing-affected sweet orange is dependent on phloem-limited bacteria and callose. Tree Physiology, 42(2), 379–390. https://doi.org/10.1093/treephys/tpab134
Wilcox, R. R. (2011). Introduction to robust estimation and hypothesis testing. Academic press.
Wolberg, S., Haim, M., & Shtein, I. (2023). Simple differential staining method of paraffin-embedded plant sections with safranin-alcian blue. IAWA Journal, 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1163/22941932-bja10124
Wu, S.-W., Kumar, R., Iswanto, A. B. B., & Kim, J.-Y. (2018). Callose balancing at plasmodesmata. Journal of Experimental Botany. https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/ery317
Wulff, N., Daniel, B., Sassi, R., Moreira, A., Bassanezi, R., Sala, I., Coletti, D., & Rodrigues, J. (2020). Incidence of Diaphorina citri Carrying Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus in Brazil’s Citrus Belt. Insects, 11(10), 672. https://doi.org/10.3390/insects11100672
Xinmiao, L., Zhao, S., Ning, Z., Zeng, H., Shu, Y., Tao, O., Xiao, C., Lu, C., & Liu, Y. (2015). Citrus fruits as a treasure trove of active natural metabolites that potentially provide benefits for human health. Chemistry Central Journal, 9(1), 68. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13065-015-0145-9
Yang, C., Powell, C. A., Duan, Y., Shatters, R. G., Lin, Y., & Zhang, M. (2016). Mitigating citrus huanglongbing via effective application of antimicrobial compounds and thermotherapy. Crop Protection, 84, 150–158. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cropro.2016.03.013
Zhang, R., Qi, H., Sun, Y., Xiao, S., & Lim, B. L. (2017). Transgenic Arabidopsis thaliana containing increased levels of ATP and sucrose is more susceptible to Pseudomonas syringae. PLOS ONE, 12(2), e0171040. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0171040

 
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH
Jacobo Robledo, a native of Manizales, Colombia, is an experienced research support professional at the Colombian Corporation for Agricultural Research (AGROSAVIA). With a Bachelor's degree in Agricultural Engineering from the University of Caldas, Colombia, obtained in 2018, he has been dedicated to developing management strategies and screening for important plant diseases in the Colombian Caribbean region for over two years. In 2023, he successfully completed his Master of Science in Plant Pathology under the guidance of Drs. Amit Levy and Christopher Vincent at the Citrus Research and Education Center in Lake Alfred, Florida. Jacobo's research focuses on understanding the mechanisms of tolerance in plants, utilizing multidisciplinary approaches from the fields of plant physiology, pathology, and anatomy. He is particularly interested in exploring the epidemiological effects of implementing management strategies and inducing tolerant traits in HLB-susceptible cultivars at both small and large scales. Through his work, he aims to contribute to the development of effective strategies for mitigating the impact of devastating plant diseases and promoting sustainable agriculture practices.
