Phloem and xylem responses are both implicated in HLB tolerance of Sugar Belle®

Jacobo Robledo1, Stacy Welker1, Ilana Shtein3, Christopher Vincent2, Amit Levy1*



1 Citrus Research and Education Center, Plant Pathology Department, University of Florida, Lake Alfred, FL, 33850, USA
2 Citrus Research and Education Center, Horticultural Sciences Department, University of Florida, Lake Alfred, FL, 33850, USA
3 Eastern Region Research and Development Center, Ariel, Israel
Corresponding author: Amit Levy; E-mail: amitlevy@ufl.edu


Funding: Research was funded by the National Institute of Food and Agriculture grant number 2020-70029-33197


ABSTRACT

While HLB is a devastating citrus disease, improved tolerant cultivars, like Sugar Belle® (SB) mandarin, have been identified. To understand the responses that HLB-affected SB undergoes, we compared 14CO2 fixation, carbohydrate export, phloem callose accumulation, relative expression of plant defense activators, and anatomical changes between healthy and infected SB trees versus susceptible Pineapple (PA) sweet orange. Eight to 10-weeks-old leaves of infected SB showed a 2.5-fold increase in 14CO2 fixation and a 13% decrease in 14C-carbohydrate export whereas HLB-affected PA presented a decrease of 33% and 50%, respectively. Infected SB exhibited 28% transversal phloem plugging while in diseased PA it was 41%. Mean distance of a callose deposit to its closest neighbor was 36% smaller in infected SB versus healthy while in HLB-affected PA it was 33% higher. Expression of papain-like cysteine proteases (PLCPs) was upregulated in SB but downregulated in PA. Infected SB showed minor alterations in the number of xylem vessels, 16% larger xylem vessel’s lumen area, and a 14% increase in the proportional area of the xylem. In contrast, PA showed a 2.4-folf increase in xylem vessel’s number and a 2% increase in the proportional xylem area. Three complementary mechanisms of tolerance in SB are hypothesized: i) increased carbohydrate availability induced by greater CO2 fixation, mild effect in carbohydrate export, and local accumulation of callose in the phloem, ii) activation of defense response via upregulation of PLCPs, and iii) increased investment in xylem structure. Thus,phloem and xylem modifications seem to be involved in SB tolerance. 

KEYWORDS: Citrus greening, physiology, Huanglongbing, anatomy, plant breeding, phloem, xylem, plant diseases 

INTRODUCTION

Huanglongbing (HLB), also known as citrus greening, is a devastating disease that currently poses a significant threat to the sustainability of the citrus industry in Florida (Shahzad et al., 2023; Singerman & Rogers, 2020). The total area dedicated to citrus production in Florida has dropped by 50% compared to pre-HLB reports as of 2022 (U.S. Department of Agriculture, 2022). Caused by a phloem-restricted alphaproteobacteria called Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus (CLas), this disease was first reported in China centuries ago (Bové, 2006; Reinking, 1919). The vector of this bacterium, Diaphorina citri Kuwayama (Hemiptera: Liviidae), spreads CLas over long distances, and its potential distribution under a climate change scenario poses a significant threat to pathogen-free areas (Ajene et al., 2020; Alves et al., 2020; Graham et al., 2020; Wulff et al., 2020). 
Significant progress has been made in understanding the harmful effects of HLB on citrus plants. CLas infection in Citrus sinensis induces systemic and chronic immune responses in the phloem, leading to complex sequences of anatomical and physiological impairments (Bernardini et al., 2022; Ma et al., 2022; Welker et al., 2022). Symptoms include yellowing of foliage and shoots, twig dieback, defoliation, lopsided premature fruits, sporadic tree death, stunting, and most importantly, fruit drop (Aritua et al., 2013; da Graça et al., 2016; Tang & Vashisth, 2020). Abnormalities like hypertrophy of phloem cells, phloem collapse and cell disruption, cell wall distortion and thickening, cambium degeneration, starch accumulation, and callose deposition in the phloem have been reported as a consequence of the disease  (Deng et al., 2019; Jing Fan et al., 2012; Kim et al., 2009). Additionally, restriction of symplastic movement, delay of photo-assimilate export, and a quantitative reduction of carbohydrate translocation speed have been notoriously associated with phloem plugging (Koh et al., 2012; Welker et al., 2021). However, the interactions involved in this pathosystem are still not fully elucidated, impeding the quick development of commercial citrus cultivars with resistance to HLB.
Although commercial resistant alternatives to HLB are currently unavailable, various citrus cultivars have demonstrated differential susceptibility to the disease in both greenhouse and field studies (Deng et al., 2019; Jing Fan et al., 2012, 2013; Martinelli et al., 2016; Ramadugu et al., 2016; Viteri et al., 2021). Certain commercial varieties of lemon, trifoliate citrus hybrids, and Persian lime have exhibited reduced susceptibility to HLB (Albrecht & Bowman, 2011; Curtolo et al., 2020; Folimonova et al., 2009; Miles et al., 2017; Ramadugu et al., 2016; N. Wang et al., 2017). Moreover, long-term field experiments have demonstrated the HLB-tolerance of “LB8-9” Sugar Belle® [SB], a commercial mandarin hybrid [“Clementine” mandarin × “Minneola” tangelo] (Gmitter et al., 2010), based on morphometric variables and fruit load but not in less leaf symptoms or bacterial titer (Stover et al., 2016). These observations have spurred research into the mechanisms involved in HLB-tolerance of SB mandarins, with promising findings emerging in this area. 
Studies using SB as a reference have linked its tolerance to alterations in the terpenoid biosynthetic pathway, increasing green leaf  volatiles, thymol metabolic pathways, and phloem regeneration (Deng et al., 2019, 2021). Additionally, the cultivar's reduced fruit drop has been attributed to an advanced antioxidant system based on its relative mild increase in senescence and cell death genes when compared to susceptible Hamlin sweet orange (Tang & Vashisth, 2020). SB also exhibits an abundance of several amino acids, sugars, sugar alcohols, and antimicrobial phenolic compounds such as benzoic, ferulic, and caffeic acids (Killiny et al., 2017, 2018). However, these metabolic profiles vary considerably depending on the rootstock on which SB is grafted (Jones & Killiny, 2021). Overall, these studies suggest that SB's tolerance mechanisms hypothetically mitigate oxidative stress induced by CLas, boost plant growth and defense simultaneously, and induce protection of the plant under pathogen attack (Deng et al., 2019, 2021; Jones & Killiny, 2021; Killiny et al., 2017, 2018; Tang & Vashisth, 2020). Nevertheless, the quantitative differences that this tolerant mandarin may have in key limiting abnormalities produced by HLB, such as carbohydrate export and callose deposition dynamics, have not been explored.
Therefore, the aim of this study was to identify and quantify some of the mechanisms underlying the HLB-tolerance of SB. We achieved this by standardizing the impairments induced by HLB in SB through a direct comparison of healthy and infected plants. The relative changes in the tolerant cultivar were then compared to the changes observed in the susceptible pineapple (PA) sweet orange. We addressed three questions regarding physiological, pathological, and anatomical phenomena, respectively: i) How can the HLB tolerance of SB be explained based on carbohydrate and callose dynamics? ii) How are some components of the defense response (PLCPs and NPR1) involved in the tolerance of this mandarin? iii) Besides the well documented phloem regeneration, what quantitative anatomical adaptations are induced in the tolerant material?

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Plant materials and growth conditions

This experiment used a completely randomized design. Budwood from PA (Citrus sinensis) and SB (Citrus reticulata) of both healthy and CLas-infected trees were collected and grafted on Volkamer lemon (Citrus volkameriana) in January 2021. Grafted plants were kept in an air-conditioned greenhouse (27°C) and natural day/night cycle at the Citrus Research and Education Center (CREC) located in Lake Alfred, FL. CLas infection was confirmed in the plants obtained from diseased PA and SB with qPCR. Then, the trees were pruned in September 2021 to control the possible effect of leaf age on carbohydrate export. On a weekly basis, new shoots of at least 5 centimeters in length were labeled to track their age. Five plants from every combination (PA-healthy, PA-HLB+, SB-healthy, and SB-HLB+) were selected for this study.

14C fixation and export assay

Selected plants were transferred to a radioisotope-rated greenhouse in October 2021. The fixation of 14CO2 and export of 14C-sugar were assessed following the recommendations of Vincent et al., 2019 using anexperimental setup previously described (Li & Vincent, 2022; Welker et al., 2022). Briefly, the second or third oldest leaf of an 8- to 10-week-old shoot was selected from healthy and infected PA and SB trees. Then, the leaf was placed in a hermetic chamber that allows 90% light transmission, connected to a close airflow mechanism circulated by an air pump. 14CO2 was generated by mixing 150 μl of 1 M citric acid with 100 μl of liquid sodium 14C-bicarbonate (0.1 mCi). Leaves were incubated for 30 minutes; then, the air in the system was vented for one hour, and a circular sample of the leaf of approximately 7 mm in diameter was collected and immersed in 25 mL of commercial liquid scintillation cocktail (ScintiVerse, Fisher Scientific). Twenty-four hours later, another sample of the same leaf was taken following the above-mentioned procedure. Samples were incubated in the cocktail solution for three days, and radioactivity levels were measured with a liquid scintillation counter (Beckman LS-65000, Beckman Instruments, Fullerton, CA). The percentage of 14C-carbohydrate export in the leaf was calculated as described in Equation 1, while the total 14C signal immediately after labeling was considered to be the carbon fixation. One plant of every combination (PA-healthy, PA-HLB+, SB-healthy, and SB-HLB+) was labeled per day, and the five replicates were performed on consecutive days. The experiment was replicated twice over time (December 2022 and May 2023). To allow the comparison of results from replicates of different dates and reduce the effect of confounding factors in the absolute values of these variables, the values were analyzed as fold-changes between the infected and healthy trees in each cultivar within the same experimental day.
Equation 1:

(_^14)LCE=  (c_1- c_24)/c_1   ×100
14LCE = leaf 14C-carbohydrate export (%)
C1 = radioactivity of the leaf disk 1 h after the 14CO2 inoculation  
C24 = radioactivity of the leaf disk 24 h after the 14CO2 inoculation  

Quantification of starch

Starch content was assessed in the next leaf following the 14C-labeled leaf. Five plants from each combination (PA-healthy, PA-HLB+, SB-healthy, and SB-HLB+) were evaluated, with one leaf per plant. The experiment was performed twice over time. Briefly, three leaf punches, approximately 7 mm in diameter, were sampled and placed in 2 mL reinforced tubes with 500 μL of distilled water and five metallic beads, each 2.8 mm in diameter. The samples were homogenized for three minutes at 6,500 RPM on a Precellys 24 tissue homogenizer. Then, the mixture was boiled for 10 minutes, vortexed, and centrifuged for 2 minutes at 2,500 RPM. Three hundred μL of supernatant were transferred to a clean 2 mL tube, and 900 μL of 200-proof ethanol were added. The mixture was vortexed, centrifuged for 10 minutes at 14,000 RPM, and the supernatant was removed. Next, the pellet was homogenized in 1 mL of DI water. Finally, 50 μL of the mixture, 50 μL of iodine solution (2% [w/v] of Potassium Iodide and 0.2% [w/v] Iodine), and 200 μL of DI water were added to individual wells of a 96-well microplate. Absorbance at 595 nm was read using a SpectraMax 250 microplate reader (Molecular Devices). Each plate included standards of starch rice at different dilution factors. Linear functions based on the standard curve of concentrations were generated to determine the concentration of starch in the samples (Keeley et al., 2022). The final value of the starch content of each sample was the average of three technical replicates.

Callose quantification

Three bark peels of shoots from 8 to 11 weeks in age were collected from three trees of each combination (PA-healthy, PA-HLB+, SB-healthy, and SB-HLB+). Sections of 0.5 to 1 cm wide and 2 to 3 cm in length were peeled away with a scalpel and immediately immersed into 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes containing 85% ice-cold ethanol. Subsequently, the tissues were destained overnight at room temperature in the ethanol solution and rehydrated in 0.01% Tween-20 for 1 hour. Next, the peels were stained with aniline blue (0.6 M glycine, 0.01% [w/v] aniline blue at pH 9.5 adjusted with KOH) following the protocol developed by Levy et al. (2007). A Leica SP8 confocal microscope with a 10×/0.32 NA objective was used to observe the tissues. The diameter of the pinhole was set at 330.5 µm, a 405 nm diode laser at 25% power was used for excitation, and for emission detection, a 475–525 nm band-pass filter with gain at 400.9 and offset at −0.09 was utilized. Three images of the peel's phloem were taken per sample. Every image was preprocessed with a mean filter with a radius of three pixels using FIJI software (Schindelin et al., 2012). The number of callose deposits per frame, their mean size, area, and the pixel coordinates of the callose deposit in the frame were quantified using the supervised machine learning method developed with Ilastik (Berg et al., 2019; Welker & Levy, 2022). The distance of every callose deposit to its closest neighbor was calculated using the package Spatstat (v 3.0.2; Baddeley et al., 2015) in R (v4.2.1.R Core Team, 2022). The object classification obtained from Ilastik was manually rotated to ensure that phloem vessels were oriented at a 90° angle. Resulting images were saved as text images, and the number of pixels on the X-axis that contained at least one pixel classified as callose by any of its Y pixels was counted. A percentage of transverse plugging was calculated with this value and the total number of X pixels in every image. A detailed scheme of the workflow used for measuring phloem transversal plugging in bark peels is depicted in Supplementary workflow 1.

Relative gene expression:

Five callose synthase, three glucanase, one Ferredoxin-NADP reductase, three defense response genes, and one senescence-related gene were selected to determine their relative expression in PA and SB (Supplementary Table 1). For this purpose, three old (273 ± 30 days), medium (101.4 ± 22 days), and young (27.1 ± 9 days) leaves were chosen from three trees of each combination (PA-healthy, PA-HLB+, SB-healthy, and SB-HLB+). Samples were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and pulverized. Next, 100 mg of ground tissue was selected, and total RNA was extracted using Trizol reagent (Invitrogen), followed by a DNase I (Life Technologies) treatment to remove DNA contaminants. Complementary DNA was synthesized using the High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (Applied Biosystems) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Reverse Transcription Quantitative PCR was performed with the PowerUp SYBR Green Master Mix (Applied Biosystems). For this purpose, complementary DNA was diluted to 3.3 ng/µL and 10 µL of the reaction mixture was prepared as follows: 5 µL PowerUp SYBR Green Master Mix, 0.5 µL of each forward and reverse primer (10 mM; Supplementary Table 1), and 1.33 µL of cDNA. Three technical replicates were used for each sample. Thermocycling was carried out using the model 7500 Fast Real-Time PCR system (Applied Biosystems) with the following settings: 50°C for 2 minutes, 95°C for 2 minutes, and 40 cycles of alternating 95°C for 35 seconds and 60°C for 30 seconds followed by a dissociation step at the end. Relative gene expression was calculated using GAPDH as the reference gene following the 2-ΔΔCt method (Livak & Schmittgen, 2001). The arithmetic mean of ΔCts of healthy plants in each gene by cultivar was used as the control group.

Assessment of symptom severity

HLB-symptom severity in infected PA and SB was assessed in five trees per cultivar by 15 knowledgeable evaluators from the Citrus Research Education Center (CREC). All trees were randomized into two separate benches, and their identification tags were removed and replaced with common names traditionally associated with men and women in even proportions. The scoring scale used in this study was developed by Robertson et al., 2018 and is briefly described as follows: Score 0 = no symptoms, Score 1 = very mild symptoms on some leaves, Score 2 = clear symptoms on most leaves, and Score 3 = severe symptoms on most leaves. A visual representation of the severity scale was provided in the format used by the evaluators to record the scores. During the assessment, the evaluators did not have direct contact with each other. Finally, the mean severity score by cultivar was calculated for each evaluator. The likelihood of obtaining higher scores from the same evaluators in one of the cultivars was analyzed using a paired Welch's T-test. 

Total nucleic acid extraction

Sections of the midrib of fully expanded but tender leaves were chopped. Samples of 100 mg were freeze-ground in a Qiagen® TissueLyser II for 30 seconds at 30 beats per second with two 5 mm diameter metal beads. The cycle was repeated until the tissues reached a powdery consistency. Next, the powder was homogenized with 1 mL of CTAB (10% V/V 1M Tris pH 8, 8.2% W/V NaCl, 10% V/V 0.5 EDTA pH 8, 2.5 % W/V CTAB, and 1% W/V PVP-40). The mixture was incubated in a water bath for 30 min at 65℃. Five hundred μL of 24:1 chloroform: amyl alcohol were added and the mixture was vortexed for 5 s. Then, samples were centrifuged at 13.000 RPM for 1 min and the top layer was poured off in a new 1.5 mL Eppendorf tube. A similar volume (~400 μL) of -20℃ isopropyl alcohol was incorporated and the mixture was incubated for 15 min at -20℃. After that, samples were centrifuged at 15.000 RPM for 5 minutes. The supernatant was dumped out and the pellet was washed with 75% ethanol and centrifuged at 15.000 RPM for 5 minutes. The ethanol was removed, and all the remaining liquid was extracted with a P-100 pipette. Finally, samples were air-dried in a laminar flow hood for 5 minutes and extracted DNA was reconstituted in 50 μL of DNAase-free water. The quality and concentration of DNA were determined with a BioDrop µLITE spectrophotometer. All the samples were standardized to a concentration of 100 ng/μL.

Relative quantification of CLas genetic material by q-PCR

CLas genetic material was quantified in the same leaves that were utilized for the starch quantification. To determine the relative quantification of CLas in leaf midrib we targeted the genomic region of the rplJ/rplL ribosomal protein with the CQULA primer set [CQULA04F= 5′-TGAATTCTTCGAGGTTGGTGAGC-3′, CQULA04R= 5′-AGAATTCGACTTAATCCCCACCT-3′,  and TaqMan probe CQULAP10= 5′-ATCGTCTCGTCAAGATTGCTATCCGTGATACTAG-3′] (Z. Wang et al., 2006). Briefly, for each sample 25 µL of reaction mixture containing 1x TaqMan™ Fast Universal PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems), 0.8 µM of each primer, 0.2 µM of TaqMan probe, and 100 ng of DNA was used. The reaction was carried out in an Applied Biosystems™ 7500 Real-Time PCR System following the next conditions: 50°C for 2 min, 95°C for 10 min, 40 cycles at 95°C for 15 seconds, and 64°C for 45 seconds. A manual threshold of 0.2 was set to record the Ct values. The final Ct value of every sample was the average of the Ct values of two technical replicates. To facilitate the interpretation of the results, the relative quantification of CLas genetic material was expressed as ∆Ct (the difference between the Ct of the no-template samples and the Ct of the experiment samples). Thus, greater ∆Ct values depict a higher amount of CLas DNA.

Quantification of anatomical variables

An anatomical analysis was conducted on the leaf petioles and midribs of the leaf immediately following the 14CO2 labeled leaf in five different trees (replicates) from each of the four treatment combinations (PA-healthy, PA-HLB+, SB-healthy, and SB-HLB+), resulting in a total of five samples per treatment. 
Petioles were fixed, embedded, sectioned, and stained for histological analysis following the method previously described (Wolberg et al., 2023). Briefly, the samples were fixed in FAA solution (formalin: acetic acid: ethanol 70% 1:1:18) and embedded in paraffin wax (Leica). Sections were cut at 12 μm thickness using a rotary automatic microtome (CUT 6062, SLEE medical GmbH, Germany) and stained with Safranin-Alcian Blue. 
From each midrib, three samples were taken from the proximal, medial, and distal areas of the leaves. Midribs of 5 mm length were dissected from the leaves and fixed for 4 h at room temperature in 3% (v/v) glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M of potassium phosphate buffer at pH 7.2. Then the tissues were washed in phosphate buffer and postfixed for 4 h at room temperature in 2% osmium tetroxide (w/v) in potassium phosphate buffer at pH 7.2. The samples were washed in the phosphate buffer, dehydrated in a 10% acetone (v/v) series (10 min per step), and infiltrated and embedded in Spurr’s resin over 3 d (Achor et al., 2020). From the ribbons, 1 μm sections were cut and placed in a drop of water on a microscope slide. The samples were left in a hot plate at 37°C overnight to ensure that the tissue is adhered to the slide. Subsequently, the slides were stained and counterstained for 30 s in methylene blue/azure A and a basic fuchsin, respectively (Humphrey & Pittman, 1974). 
Images were taken with an OMAX 14.0MP CCD digital camera on an Olympus BX61 epifluorescence microscope (Olympus Inc., Tokyo, Japan). For petioles and leaf midrib sections the area of the pith, xylem, and phloem (excluding phloem fibers) were manually delimitated with the pencil tool of FIJI (Schindelin et al., 2012) with, red, magenta, and yellow colors, respectively. Next, areas were measured in FIJI selecting the color shapes through a color threshold macro in a batch mode. These selections were saved as regions of interest (ROI) and loaded into an 8-bit transformed image. Then we measured the number of cells and average area of xylem vessel’s lumen. To measure these variables, we used the threshold tool from FIJI to quantify lumen area in the excluded area between regions of interest ([xylem+pith] - pith). Finally, a size threshold of 8 μm2 was set to differentiate parenchyma and fiber cells from xylem vessels. Counts above this threshold were considered xylem vessels. A detailed scheme of the workflow used for measuring morphometric variables of xylem vessels is depicted in Supplementary workflow 2. All macros and threshold settings are available in the next repository (the repository will keep private until manuscript acceptance): https://github.com/jrobledob/Rep_code_Tolerance_of_Sugar_Belle.

Statistical analysis

The study utilized a completely randomized design and R (v3.02; R Core Team, 2022) was used for statistical analysis. Two analyses were conducted to determine: i) the effect of HLB on healthy and infected plants within the same cultivar, and ii) the difference in relative changes between tolerant and susceptible cultivars due to HLB. In the first analysis, normality was assessed using the Shapiro-Wilk test. For variables that followed a normal distribution, a two-tailed Welch's T-test was used to analyze means, assuming unequal variances (unless otherwise specified in specific sections of the methods). For non-normally distributed variables, medians were contrasted using the non-parametric Wilcox's test. The P values of the tests were automatically depicted in the figures using the ggpubr package (v0.4.0; Kassambara, 2020).
For the second analysis, the fold-change of each variable, defined as the value in infected plants divided by the value in healthy plants, was calculated. This approach allowed for a relative comparison of the effect of HLB in both cultivars, accounting for the possible influence of the two different citrus species on the absolute estimates of the variables. A permutation test was developed to test the hypothesis that the fold changes of PA and SB had identical distributions, following the steps outlined in Wilcox, 2011. The complete raw data and full reproducible code are available in the following repository (which will be kept private until manuscript acceptance): https://github.com/jrobledob/Rep_code_Tolerance_of_Sugar_Belle.
RESULTS

The HLB-tolerant cultivar enhances its 14CO2 fixation and attenuates the reduction in 14C-carbohydrate export

To determine the differences in 14CO2 fixation and 14C-carbohydrate export between infected and healthy plants within each cultivar, the fold-changes of these variables were calculated. Obtained mean of the standardize results of each cultivar per day were compared to μ=0, which is the expected value obtained when these variables of infected and healthy plants are identical. Infected PA exhibited a 30% downregulation of 14CO2 fixation, while diseased SB showed a 2.5-fold upregulation of this variable. The mean log2 fold-change in 14CO2 fixation of PA was significantly smaller than 0 at P=0.01, but in SB, this value could be greater than 0 (P=0.06) (Figure 1A). Moreover, the relative expression of Ferredoxin-NADP reductase (Cs1g25510), a gene involved in CO2 fixation during photosynthesis, was 2.9-fold upregulated in leaves of different ages in diseased SB (Figure 1B). When the relative gene expression of this gene was analyzed by leaf age, a significant difference between means was observed mainly in young leaves (Supplementary Figure 1). The observed difference of fold-changes between SB and PA in 14CO2 fixation and expression of Ferredoxin-NADP reductase was significant at P=0.01 and P=0.02, respectively, indicating a contrasting behavior between cultivars (Figure 5).

A downregulation of 13% and 38% on the 14C-carbohydrate export was obtained in infected SB and PA trees, respectively (Figure 1C). In both cultivars, the observed log2 mean fold-change in 14C-carbohydrate export was smaller than 0 (P<0.001 for PA and P=0.01 for SB). Additionally, the estimated difference between fold-changes in 14C-carbohydrate export of SB and PA was significant at P=0.01 (Figure 5). These results indicate that the downregulation of 14C-carbohydrate export in PA is considerably greater than the downregulation in SB.

Carbohydrate accumulation in the leaves was expected due to the observed imbalances in the 14CO2 fixation and 14C-carbohydrate export. Therefore, the leaf starch content was measured. In PA, the mean starch content of healthy material was 8.6% greater than the mean from infected trees. Meanwhile, a sharp 2.6-fold increase in this variable was noted in the SB-infected plants with respect to the healthy trees (Figure 1D). The means of starch content of healthy and infected PA trees were similar (P=0.42), but the averages obtained in SB were significantly different at P<0.001 (Figure 1D). Additionally, the observed difference between the fold changes in starch content of both cultivars suggests a clear distinction at P<0.001 between the relative increase of this variable in infected SB and a relative decrease in PA (Figure 5).

Aggregated accumulation of callose deposits is prevalent in the tolerant cultivar  

The role of callose in healthy and infected trees within each cultivar was studied by the number, size, area, and percentage of transversal plugging of callose deposits, as well as the mean distance of deposits to their closest neighbor. Healthy PA had 61% more callose deposits compared to infected PA, while healthy SB had 68% fewer callose deposits than HLB-affected SB trees (Figure 2A). Moreover, the mean size of callose deposits was significantly larger in infected plants, regardless of cultivar (Figure 2B). Healthy PA had a 29% larger mean area of callose deposits than infected PA, but there was not strong evidence to suggest that these values were different (P=0.07). Infected SB had a 97% higher mean area of callose deposits than SB disease-free trees (P<0.01; Figure 2C). The mean distance to the closest neighbor of callose deposits in infected SB was 36% smaller than healthy SB, while the opposite was observed in PA [33% larger] (Figure 2D). In the tolerant cultivar, a contrasted behavior in the transversal phloem plugging was observed (P=0.02) but not in the susceptible (P=0.71) [Supplementary Figure 2]. The percentage of transversal phloem plugging in healthy SB was 18% and 28% in the HLB-affected SB. In PA, infected trees reached a transversal phloem plugging of 42%, while healthy trees had 41% (Supplementary Figure 2).
Then we expressed the variations observed between infected and healthy plants in callose deposition by cultivar as fold changes. The differences in SB and PA fold changes showed that the alterations in callose accumulation induced by HLB in susceptible and tolerant plants were significant at a maximum P=0.01 (Figure 5). PA exhibited a downregulation in callose deposits and area, while SB presented an upregulation of the number, size, and area. However, the tolerant cultivar showed a downregulation in the distance of the closest neighbor to the callose deposits, indicating a more aggregated or sectorized distribution of this polysaccharide in the phloem of the bark peels (Figure 2F and G).
Next, we investigated the molecular dynamics underlying the changes in callose deposits observed in PA and SB by analyzing the relative expression of five callose synthase (CsCal3, CsCAL7, CsCAL9, CsCAL11, CsCAL12) and three glucanase genes (GHf17 [orange1.1g015273], CsBP, and Csßg1) in leaves of different ages. In diseased PA plants, CsCAL7, CsCAL9, CsCAL11, and CsCAL12 were downregulated, while CsCal3 was upregulated, with significant differences observed for CsCAL7, CsCAL9, and CsCAL12. In contrast, all five callose synthase genes were upregulated in HLB-affected SB, with significant differences observed for CsCAL7, CsCAL9, CsCAL11, and CsCAL12 (Figure 2E and Supplementary Figure 3). Our results confirm the marked difference between cultivars, as evidenced by the opposed behavior of CsCAL7, CsCAL9, CsCAL11, and CsCAL12 in PA and SB, and the distinct values in the upregulation of CsCal3 in tolerant and susceptible cultivars (Figure 5). Interestingly, constant upregulation of callose synthase genes were observed in the combinations that exhibited more callose deposition. Nonetheless, the relative expression of the three glucanase genes did not show a contrasting behavior between healthy and infected (P min= 0.16) plants in each cultivar or between cultivars (Figure 2E and Figure 5). Thus, contribution of callose synthase genes in the callose accumulation in both cultivars was consistent while glucanase expression was not linked to either diseased plants or one specific cultivar (Figure 5).

In the tolerant cultivar there was upregulation of defense response activators, but not fewer symptoms or CLas relative titer 

We investigated the dynamics of CLas genetic material in leaves, the severity of HLB symptoms, and the expression of senescence and defense genes that are known to be affected by CLas infection. To evaluate symptom severity, we had a group of knowledgeable evaluators score the plants using a grading scale. Our results showed that 14 out of 15 evaluators reported a higher average severity score in the SB mandarin. This was further supported by significant differences at P<0.01, indicating that overall evaluators observed more severe symptom scores in the tolerant cultivar (Figure 3A).
We then examined CLas genetic material and the relative expression of several genes, including SRG1B, two PLCPs (CaAALP and CsRD19), and CsNPR1. We consistently found lower relative CLas genetic material in the susceptible PA, as depicted by a lower ∆Ct (Figure 3B). We also found that CaAALP, CsRD19, and SRG1B were downregulated in PA but upregulated in SB (Figure 3C). Major differences in the fold changes estimated from leaves of all ages were observed mainly in the susceptible cultivar (Figure 3C). However, when we analyzed the relative expression of CaAALP and CsRD19 by leaf age, we found significant upregulation in young leaves of SB (maximum P=0.03) but downregulation in PA (Supplementary Figures 4 and 5). This analysis led to a clear distinction between the observed differences in fold-changes between SB and PA (Figure 5). Overall, our results strongly suggest that the downregulation of CaAALP, CsRD19, and SRG1B in PA is a distinctive characteristic that distinguishes it from the tolerant cultivar.
Finally, we observed a greater relative expression of CsNPR1 in healthy plants of both cultivars (Figure 3C), but this differential expression is likely similar between SB and PA (P=0.71; Figure 5).

Increase relative xylem area and retaining xylem vessel metrics distinguishes the tolerant cultivar

Consistent anatomical changes were observed in petioles and leaf midribs of both healthy and infected trees. However, a different trend was observed between susceptible and tolerant cultivars. In HLB-affected PA trees, the mean total area of pith, xylem, and phloem in leaf midribs was significantly greater (2 to 3-fold) compared to healthy trees (Figure 4B). In petioles of HLB-affected PA trees, although not significant at P=0.05, the same behavior was observed with fold changes ranging between 1.2 to 2.7 for pith, xylem, and phloem area (Figure 4A). Similarly, the leaf midrib pith and xylem total area of HLB-affected SB were 30% greater than in healthy plants but not significant (Figure 4B). Pith and xylem total area of petioles in HLB-affected SB were significantly larger, between 1.7 to 2.5-fold, than disease-free SB (Figure 4B). In contrast, leaf midrib and petiole phloem total area of healthy SB was 25% and 7% greater than diseased SB, respectively (Figure 4A and B). Finally, regardless of cultivar, HLB affected trees exhibited a greater petiole transversal area although significant differences at P=0.05 were only reached for SB (Supplementary Figure 6A).
To understand the relative effect of the anatomical changes in this tissue, the proportional xylem area (compared to the total organ size) was calculated in petioles and leaf midribs. The absence of significant differences in the proportional xylem area between healthy and infected PA in both tissues suggests that this variable is likely similar (P= 0.7; Figure 4A and B). In contrast, the xylem proportional area of infected SB mandarin was greater than healthy trees in both leaf midribs and petioles (although not significant at P= 0.05 for this last organ), indicating that the anatomical modifications induced by the disease are positively affecting the relative area of the xylem specially in midribs (P< 0.001; Figure 4B). In both cultivars and evaluated tissues there was a significant relative reduction at minimum P=0.05 in the proportion of phloem area (Figure 4A and B).
Upon comparison of fold-changes of anatomical variables in midribs between SB and PA, significant differences were observed in the total area of pith, xylem, and phloem, as well as the proportional area of xylem, but not in the phloem proportional area, which is likely to be similar in both cultivars (P= 0.57) (Figure 5). Our findings suggest that the most notable anatomical modification in the tolerant SB is the relative increase in the proportional area of the xylem, which is attributed to a slight growth in the total area of both the xylem and pith, but a major reduction in the total area of phloem (Figure 5). Comparison of fold changes of petioles did not reach statistically significant differences at a P=0.05 but the trends were nearly identical at those obtained in midribs (Supplementary Figure 6B). 
To investigate the mechanisms behind the observed increase in 14CO2 fixation in CLas-tolerant SB plants, we evaluated the morphometric variables of the xylem vessels in both susceptible and tolerant cultivars, hypothesizing that differential adaptations were present. We found that HLB-affected PA plants exhibited a 2.4-fold increase in the number of xylem vessels (P<0.01), whereas infected SB plants showed a 6% reduction in this variable (Figure 4C I. and II.). However, this difference was not significant (P=0.37) and was mostly attributed to the stochastic nature of this variable. Additionally, when infected, both PA and SB showed a slight increase in the average area of the xylem vessel's lumen (14% and 16%, respectively), but significant differences at P=0.01 were only observed between healthy and infected SB plants (Figure 4C III.) indicating a clear distinction in this variable between healthy and infected SB.
In addition to this clear distinction, our comparison of the average lumen area of xylem vessels between cultivars revealed that the relative increase in average lumen area between infected and healthy plants was similar (P=0.47) for PA and SB plants (Figure 5). Although both infected cultivars showed a relative increase in xylem vessel lumen area (Figure 5), the higher variance in PA's measurements (Figure 4C III. and I.) suggests that this trend may have occurred by chance. However, there was a significant difference (P<0.001) in the relative change in the number of xylem cells between susceptible and tolerant cultivars (Figure 5). Therefore, overall, infected PA plants exhibited a substantial increase in the number of xylem vessels, while SB plants had a significant increase in the average lumen area of xylem vessels. This suggests that the mechanisms of tolerance in SB and the observed increase in CO2 fixation may be related to the increase investment of xylem structure.
DISCUSSION 

Carbohydrate dynamics and callose distribution as factors involved in the HLB-tolerance

HLB disease causes a disruption in citrus source-sink dynamics, resulting in a deleterious consequence of carbohydrate imbalance in affected trees (J. Fan et al., 2010; Nehela & Killiny, 2020; N. Wang et al., 2017). Factors such as phloem blockage, direct uptake by the bacterium, decreased photosynthesis, and starch hyperaccumulation influence sugar levels in the phloem, with both CLas and citrus hosts playing a role (Pandey et al., 2022). Recent studies have found that HLB-infected Valencia sweet orange on tolerant rootstocks exhibit differential behaviors in carbohydrate export and transport speed, indicating that different source-sink responses may play a role in tolerance (Welker et al., 2022). Our results support this idea, as we found that the tolerant SB mandarin showed a milder reduction in leaf carbohydrate export compared to the susceptible cultivar, while also exhibiting increased 14CO2 fixation. Increased fixation (on a leaf area basis) was also reported by Keeley et al. (2022), which also found that starch hyperaccumulation declined over time with more severe infection in ‘Valencia’ sweet orange, a moderately susceptible cultivar. Increased carbon fixation with sustained carbon export in SB mandarin may be responsible for the faster accumulation of starch shown in our research, and we hypothesize increased carbohydrate availability in the tolerant cultivar based the combination of high concentration of starch reserves along with sustained phloem activity (Supplementary Figure 7). These sugars, such as sucrose, are not only utilized as a direct energy source but also in important plant defense responses, including detoxification pathways (Couée et al., 2006; Keunen et al., 2013; Rojas et al., 2014; Tang & Vashisth, 2020; N. Wang & Trivedi, 2013).
Sucrose has been linked to increased disease tolerance in plants but can be advantageous for certain plant pathogens depending on the pathosystem (Liu et al., 2022). For example, transgenic tobacco and rice that accumulate sucrose through the expression of pathogen-related (PR) proteins have demonstrated protection against different plant pathogens (Gómez-Ariza et al., 2007; Murillo et al., 2003). In viral infections, sucrose plays a role in regulating plasmodesmatal aperture, which partially contributes to the development of plant defense mechanisms (Liu et al., 2022). However, the precise mechanisms by which sucrose is involved in plant defense against pathogens are not fully understood. In some cases, increased sucrose levels can actually increase plant susceptibility to pathogens, such as with transgenic Arabidopsis thaliana and Pseudomonas syringae (Zhang et al., 2017). Additionally, the transcription of sucrose transporters (SWEET) induced by TAL effectors has been shown to increase the proliferation of Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae in rice (Garcia-Ruiz et al., 2021). Since CLas is a phloem-restricted bacterium, sucrose may play an important role in restricting pathogen movement, although plasmodesmatal movement of CLas has not been proved, or as a nutritional source for the bacterium, which until today reminds unculturable, but evidence to support these two approaches is not conclusive.
Previous studies have reported a higher prevalence of sugars in HLB-tolerant citrus cultivars like SB, compared to other cultivars (Killiny et al., 2017, 2018). Our study explored the carbohydrate dynamics in SB leaves and hypothesize that the reported greater abundance of sugars in SB could be explained by the unpin in CO2 fixation and mild decrease in carbohydrate export. This phenomenon might lead to greater sucrose availability in the tolerant mandarin. However, a carbohydrate-rich environment could also create a more conducive condition for bacterial propagation and lead to higher bacterial titers (Zhang et al., 2017). Although significant advances have been made to understand the intricate interactions that CLas performs with its host, its fastidious nature, uneven distribution, and low population density in some tissues make this area of research extremely challenging (Achor et al., 2020). Nonetheless, the prospect of a suitable environment that might explain the greater abundance of CLas genetic material in SB leaves, suggests that this cultivar could be a good model to understand plant-CLas interactions.
One of the well-documented citrus responses to CLas infections is the callose accumulation in the phloem which is thought to restrict the bacterial movement (Achor et al., 2020; Boava et al., 2017; Deng et al., 2019; Folimonova et al., 2009; Koh et al., 2012). This defense mechanism is conserved across many plant species in response to both biotic and abiotic stress (B. Wang et al., 2022). However, callose deposition in citrus can also reduce carbohydrate transport in the phloem (Welker et al., 2022). Interestingly, our study found that the tolerant SB mandarin exhibited a consistent increase in callose deposition and gene expression of callose synthase genes, suggesting a proportional reduction in carbohydrate movement. Surprisingly, however, the tolerant cultivar did not decrease carbohydrate export measurably, whereas the susceptible cultivar did. This might be explained by the high accumulation of callose in the susceptible cultivar despite its infection status whereas in the tolerant cultivar initially low callose deposition in the healthy trees follows a sharp increase in the infected. Our findings support the hypothesis that the dispersion of callose deposits along the phloem, rather than their amount or size, may be more critical for reducing blockages and improving tolerance by maintaining phloem function. When we modeled the spatial distribution of callose deposition, we found that the tolerant SB had a more aggregated allocation of this polysaccharide, which may explain its milder reduction in carbohydrate export (Supplementary Figure 8).  Maintaining a larger number of open phloem fibers may result in higher total phloem conductance compared to a uniform phloem deposition, which could impair the function of all fibers.
In this study, we used non-invasive techniques to investigate the carbohydrate dynamics of citrus leaves and minimize the impact of confounding factors introduced by invasive assays to quantify callose. It is important to note that our observations were limited to early stages of CLas infection in leaf tissues and a constant young tissue age at the leaf level. Therefore, it would be premature to conclude that the hypothetical increase in carbohydrate availability in the tolerant cultivar represents the behavior of the whole plant. Furthermore, it is not clear if these mechanisms will remain constant over time as the disease progresses in severity. Additionally, although this research suggests that callose distribution is associated with the tolerance of SB, there are still significant gaps in our understanding of the anatomy of citrus sieve pores, the speed of callose formation in different citrus cultivars, and techniques for assessing in-situ callose formation. Addressing these gaps will be crucial for fully elucidating the role of callose in the development of HLB.

Defense responses, but not symptoms or bacterium titer, may contribute to tolerance

HLB is typically evaluated by assessing symptoms in leaves, such as blotchy mottle, and quantifying the genetic titer of CLas (Jing Fan et al., 2013; Kumar et al., 2022; Ramadugu et al., 2016; Shen et al., 2013; Stover & McCollum, 2011; Viteri et al., 2021). However, recent research has challenged the reliability of these metrics in predicting yield reduction. For example, a 4-year study conducted under HLB-endemic field conditions found that bacterial titers did not consistently correlate with the number of CLas bacteria present in the phloem or with yield reduction (Levy et al., 2023). 
Papain-like cysteine proteases (PLCPs) have numerous functions, including their ability to activate defense mechanisms in plants (Misas‐Villamil et al., 2016). In citrus, it is believed that HLB symptoms are caused by the inhibition of PLCPs induced by a CLas effector called Sec-delivered effector 1 (SDE1), which leads to an acceleration of leaf senescence (K. Clark et al., 2018; K. J. Clark et al., 2020). The present study found that the expression of PLCPs genes and the senescence-related gene 1 (SRG1) was upregulated in the tolerant SB but downregulated in the susceptible cultivar. This pattern, which was particularly evident in SB's young leaves, suggests a premature activation of PLCPs-induced defense responses, potentially resulting in early senescence as a physiological trade-off but a faster recognition of the pathogen. In rice, overexpression of PLCPs has been shown to attenuate the virulence of Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae by enhancing the accumulation of hydrogen peroxide and free salicylic acid (Niño et al., 2020). Similarly, the tomato papain-like Rcr3 triggers systemic acquired resistance (SAR) boosted by salicylic acid (SA) by recognizing avirulence genes of Cladosporium fulvum (Godson & van der Hoorn, 2021). Therefore, we hypothesize that the greater abundance of plant defense metabolites in SB (Killiny et al., 2017) may be associated with activation of plant defense mechanisms through the transcriptional upregulation of PLCPs.
The tolerance of SB to HLB appears to be related to cohesive physiological and pathological behaviors, such as the upregulation of PLCPs, which were observed in this study, but not leaf symptoms or CLas leaf titer. However, to fully elucidate the role of PLCPs in citrus immunity and their interactions with possible CLas effectors, further research is needed. While relative gene expression was assessed in this study to test the hypothesis of which mechanisms of defense were associated with SB tolerance, more in-depth research is necessary to validate the circumstantial evidence found and conclude its deterministic nature.
 
Xylem might play a role in HLB tolerance

Anatomical changes in vascular vessels caused by CLas infection have been widely observed in various cultivars, with significant differences seen in tolerant materials. Overall, infected leaves generally exhibit hypertrophy of phloem associated parenchyma cells, phloem collapse and disruption, xylem hyperplasia, cell wall distortion and thickening, sieve pores plugging, eventual cambium degeneration, accumulation of starch, and callose deposition, while roots show phloem cell collapses, absent phloem fibers, thickened cell walls, reduced tissue density, and depleted starch (Aritua et al., 2013; Deng et al., 2019; Ed & Cody, 2015; Jing Fan et al., 2012, 2013; Johnson et al., 2014; Kim et al., 2009; Koh et al., 2012).  In Sugar Belle® production of secondary phloem growth in older leaves has been associated with the tolerance of this cultivar (Deng et al., 2019), but xylem contribution has been constantly neglected. Since we observed an increase in the fixation of 14CO2, we evaluated the xylem contribution as a complementary mechanism of tolerance of Sugar Belle®, besides phloem regeneration. In our study, we identified an increase in the number of xylem vessels in the susceptible cultivar that in scenarios of enhanced severity may represent a prevalence of hypertrophy in the xylem as a consequence of the infection (Ed & Cody, 2015). In comparison, the number of xylem vessels in SB was not affected whereas the average lumen area of the xylem vessels increased, in parallel to increased relative xylem area. This indicates an increased investment in hydraulic conductivity in infected SB plants. Our findings suggest that increased investment in xylem structure in the leaf midribs, compared to the response of the susceptible cultivar, is associated with HLB-tolerance.
The role of the xylem in CLas disease has been largely ignored due to the bacterium's phloem-restricted nature. Xylem vessel size is probably the most important parameter in plant structure-function relations (Tyree & Zimmermann, 2013). The vessel radius in proportional in the 4th power to its hydraulic conductance; making larger vessels considerably more hydraulically efficient (Tyree & Ewers, 1991). In citrus, larger xylem vessel lumen diameters have been linked to increased root hydraulic conductance, leaf transpiration rate, and leaf biomass (Rodríguez-Gamir et al., 2010). We hypothesize that the relatively greater proportion of xylem area and increase average area of vessel’s lumen in SB may provide an anatomical advantage in reducing the HLB impairments, such as water deficit (Hamido et al., 2019). Thus, by preserving xylem hydraulic conductance in HLB-infected SB, the theoretical photosynthetic rate may reach maximum values in the absence of limiting factors such as leaf water status, stomatal aperture, and phloem load (Nardini et al., 2011). This may, in fact, contribute to the higher carbon fixation rates, in that real photosynthetic rates are closely linked to stomatal conductance in the presence or absence of HLB (Keeley et al., 2022). Thus greater xylem hydraulic conductance would permit leaves to maintain high stomatal conductance in this isohydric species (Dzikiti et al., 2007)
This study suggests that the xylem, which has been neglected as a contributor to HLB impairments, may be involved in the tolerance of SB. However, the factors that limit an overall inference of this mechanism to the whole plant are the organ and time of infection at which the assays were developed. Nevertheless, this research provides evidence to support the influence of the xylem in HLB-tolerance and opens new avenues of research that focus on this tissue as a potential contributor to compensate, at least in part, for some of the deleterious effects of the disease.
In conclusion, through contrasting comparisons, this study generates important evidence to suggest three hypothetical complementary mechanisms of tolerance in the SB mandarin: i) a boost in CO2 fixation, mild reduction of carbohydrate export, and localized distribution of callose might generate a greater sucrose availability in the tolerant cultivar, ii) activation of defense mechanisms through papain-like cysteine proteases (PLCPs) might modulate the immune response of the tolerant cultivar, and iii) increased relative xylem area and  xylem vessel’s lumen area might indicate the contribution of this tissue to the HLB tolerance representing an explanation for the unpin in CO2 fixation. Additionally, we confirmed, agreeing with previous evidence, that the severity of symptoms in leaves and relative CLas titer fail to describe the tolerance of SB. These findings may serve not only as a foundation for future investigations of HLB tolerance, but also as a reference to identify the mechanisms that management practices induce in susceptible materials.















LITERATURE CITED
Achor, D., Welker, S., Ben-Mahmoud, S., Wang, C., Folimonova, S. Y., Dutt, M., Gowda, S., & Levy, A. (2020). Dynamics of Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus Movement and Sieve-Pore Plugging in Citrus Sink Cells. Plant Physiology, 182(2), 882–891. https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.19.01391
Ajene, I. J., Khamis, F., van Asch, B., Pietersen, G., Rasowo, B. A., Ekesi, S., & Mohammed, S. (2020). Habitat suitability and distribution potential of Liberibacter species ( “Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus ” and “Candidatus Liberibacter africanus ” ) associated with citrus greening disease. Diversity and Distributions, 26(5), 575–588. https://doi.org/10.1111/ddi.13051
Albrecht, U., & Bowman, K. D. (2011). Tolerance of the Trifoliate Citrus Hybrid US-897 (Citrus reticulata Blanco × Poncirus trifoliata L. Raf.) to Huanglongbing. HortScience, 46(1), 16–22. https://doi.org/10.21273/HORTSCI.46.1.16
Alves, K. S., do Carmo, L. H. M., & Del Ponte, E. M. (2020). Spatiotemporal spread of huanglongbing in commercial citrus orchards of Minas Gerais, Brazil. Tropical Plant Pathology, 45(6), 668–679. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40858-020-00398-x
Aritua, V., Achor, D., Gmitter, F. G., Albrigo, G., & Wang, N. (2013). Transcriptional and Microscopic Analyses of Citrus Stem and Root Responses to Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus Infection. PLoS ONE, 8(9), e73742. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0073742
Baddeley, A., Rubak, E., & Turner, R. (2015). Spatial point patterns: methodology and applications with R. CRC press.
Berg, S., Kutra, D., Kroeger, T., Straehle, C. N., Kausler, B. X., Haubold, C., Schiegg, M., Ales, J., Beier, T., Rudy, M., Eren, K., Cervantes, J. I., Xu, B., Beuttenmueller, F., Wolny, A., Zhang, C., Koethe, U., Hamprecht, F. A., & Kreshuk, A. (2019). ilastik: interactive machine learning for (bio)image analysis. Nature Methods, 16(12), 1226–1232. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-019-0582-9
Bernardini, C., Turner, D., Wang, C., Welker, S., Achor, D., Artiga, Y. A., Turgeon, R., & Levy, A. (2022). Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus accumulation in the phloem inhibits callose and reactive oxygen species. Plant Physiology, 190(2), 1090–1094. https://doi.org/10.1093/plphys/kiac346
Boava, L. P., Cristofani-Yaly, M., & Machado, M. A. (2017). Physiologic, Anatomic, and Gene Expression Changes in Citrus sunki , Poncirus trifoliata , and Their Hybrids After ‘ Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus’ Infection. Phytopathology®, 107(5), 590–599. https://doi.org/10.1094/PHYTO-02-16-0077-R
Bové, J. M. (2006). HUANGLONGBING: A DESTRUCTIVE, NEWLY-EMERGING, CENTURY-OLD DISEASE OF CITRUS. Journal of Plant Pathology, 88(1), 7–37. http://www.jstor.org/stable/41998278
Clark, K., Franco, J. Y., Schwizer, S., Pang, Z., Hawara, E., Liebrand, T. W. H., Pagliaccia, D., Zeng, L., Gurung, F. B., Wang, P., Shi, J., Wang, Y., Ancona, V., van der Hoorn, R. A. L., Wang, N., Coaker, G., & Ma, W. (2018). An effector from the Huanglongbing-associated pathogen targets citrus proteases. Nature Communications, 9(1), 1718. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-04140-9
Clark, K. J., Pang, Z., Trinh, J., Wang, N., & Ma, W. (2020). Sec-Delivered Effector 1 (SDE1) of ‘ Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus’ Promotes Citrus Huanglongbing. Molecular Plant-Microbe Interactions®, 33(12), 1394–1404. https://doi.org/10.1094/MPMI-05-20-0123-R
Couée, I., Sulmon, C., Gouesbet, G., & El Amrani, A. (2006). Involvement of soluble sugars in reactive oxygen species balance and responses to oxidative stress in plants. Journal of Experimental Botany, 57(3), 449–459. https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/erj027
Curtolo, M., de Souza Pacheco, I., Boava, L. P., Takita, M. A., Granato, L. M., Galdeano, D. M., de Souza, A. A., Cristofani-Yaly, M., & Machado, M. A. (2020). Wide-ranging transcriptomic analysis of Poncirus trifoliata, Citrus sunki, Citrus sinensis and contrasting hybrids reveals HLB tolerance mechanisms. Scientific Reports, 10(1), 20865. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-77840-2
da Graça, J. V., Douhan, G. W., Halbert, S. E., Keremane, M. L., Lee, R. F., Vidalakis, G., & Zhao, H. (2016). Huanglongbing: An overview of a complex pathosystem ravaging the world’s citrus. Journal of Integrative Plant Biology, 58(4), 373–387. https://doi.org/10.1111/jipb.12437
Deng, H., Achor, D., Exteberria, E., Yu, Q., Du, D., Stanton, D., Liang, G., & Gmitter Jr., F. G. (2019). Phloem Regeneration Is a Mechanism for Huanglongbing-Tolerance of “Bearss” Lemon and “LB8-9” Sugar Belle® Mandarin. Frontiers in Plant Science, 10. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2019.00277
Deng, H., Zhang, Y., Reuss, L., Suh, J. H., Yu, Q., Liang, G., Wang, Y., & Gmitter, F. G. (2021). Comparative Leaf Volatile Profiles of Two Contrasting Mandarin Cultivars against Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus Infection Illustrate Huanglongbing Tolerance Mechanisms. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 69(37), 10869–10884. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jafc.1c02875
Dzikiti, S., Steppe, K., Lemeur, R., & Milford, J. (2007). Whole-tree level water balance and its implications on stomatal oscillations in orange trees [Citrus sinensis (L.) Osbeck] under natural climatic conditions. Journal of Experimental Botany, 58(7), 1893–1901. https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/erm023
Ed, E., & Cody, N. (2015). ANATOMY OF THE CITRUS LEAF PETIOLE: HEALTHY VS. HUANGLONGBING. Acta Horticulturae, 1065, 891–897. https://doi.org/10.17660/ActaHortic.2015.1065.110
Fan, J., Chen, C., Brlansky, R. H., Gmitter Jr., F. G., & Li, Z.-G. (2010). Changes in carbohydrate metabolism in Citrus sinensis infected with ‘Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus.’ Plant Pathology, 59(6), 1037–1043. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-3059.2010.02328.x
Fan, Jing, Chen, C., Achor, D. S., Brlansky, R. H., Li, Z.-G., & Gmitter, F. G. (2013). Differential anatomical responses of tolerant and susceptible citrus species to the infection of ‘Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus.’ Physiological and Molecular Plant Pathology, 83, 69–74. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pmpp.2013.05.002
Fan, Jing, Chen, C., Yu, Q., Khalaf, A., Achor, D. S., Brlansky, R. H., Moore, G. A., Li, Z.-G., & Gmitter, F. G. (2012). Comparative Transcriptional and Anatomical Analyses of Tolerant Rough Lemon and Susceptible Sweet Orange in Response to ‘ Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus’ Infection. Molecular Plant-Microbe Interactions®, 25(11), 1396–1407. https://doi.org/10.1094/MPMI-06-12-0150-R
Folimonova, S. Y., Robertson, C. J., Garnsey, S. M., Gowda, S., & Dawson, W. O. (2009). Examination of the Responses of Different Genotypes of Citrus to Huanglongbing (Citrus Greening) Under Different Conditions. Phytopathology®, 99(12), 1346–1354. https://doi.org/10.1094/PHYTO-99-12-1346
Garcia-Ruiz, H., Szurek, B., & Van den Ackerveken, G. (2021). Stop helping pathogens: engineering plant susceptibility genes for durable resistance. Current Opinion in Biotechnology, 70, 187–195. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.copbio.2021.05.005
Gmitter, F. G., Castle, W. S., & Grosser, J. W. (2010). Mandarin tree named ‘LB8-9’ (Patent No. PP21356).
Gómez-Ariza, J., Campo, S., Rufat, M., Estopà, M., Messeguer, J., Segundo, B. S., & Coca, M. (2007). Sucrose-Mediated Priming of Plant Defense Responses and Broad-Spectrum Disease Resistance by Overexpression of the Maize Pathogenesis-Related PRms Protein in Rice Plants. Molecular Plant-Microbe Interactions®, 20(7), 832–842. https://doi.org/10.1094/MPMI-20-7-0832
Graham, J., Gottwald, T., & Setamou, M. (2020). Status of Huanglongbing (HLB) outbreaks in Florida, California and Texas. Tropical Plant Pathology, 45(3), 265–278. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40858-020-00335-y
Hamido, S. A., Ebel, R. C., & Morgan, K. T. (2019). Interaction of Huanglongbing and Foliar Applications of Copper on Water Relations of Citrus sinensis cv. Valencia. Plants, 8(9), 298. https://doi.org/10.3390/plants8090298
Humphrey, C. D., & Pittman, F. E. (1974). A simple methylene blue-azure II-basic fuchsin stain for epoxy-embedded tissue sections. Stain Technology, 49(1), 9–14.
Johnson, E. G., Wu, J., Bright, D. B., & Graham, J. H. (2014). Association of ‘ Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus’ root infection, but not phloem plugging with root loss on huanglongbing-affected trees prior to appearance of foliar symptoms. Plant Pathology, 63(2), 290–298. https://doi.org/10.1111/ppa.12109
Jones, S. E., & Killiny, N. (2021). Influence of Rootstock on the Leaf Volatile Organic Compounds of Citrus Scion Is More Pronounced after the Infestation with Diaphorina citri. Plants, 10(11), 2422. https://doi.org/10.3390/plants10112422
Kassambara, A. (2020). ggpubr: “ggplot2” Based Publication Ready Plots. R package version 0.4.0. https://cran.r-project.org/package=ggpubr
Keeley, M., Rowland, D., & Vincent, C. (2022). Citrus photosynthesis and morphology acclimate to phloem‐affecting huanglongbing disease at the leaf and shoot levels. Physiologia Plantarum, 174(2). https://doi.org/10.1111/ppl.13662
Keunen, E., Peshev, D., Vangronsveld, J., Van Den Ende, W., & Cuypers, A. (2013). Plant sugars are crucial players in the oxidative challenge during abiotic stress: extending the traditional concept. Plant, Cell & Environment, 36(7), 1242–1255. https://doi.org/10.1111/pce.12061
Killiny, N., Jones, S. E., Nehela, Y., Hijaz, F., Dutt, M., Gmitter, F. G., & Grosser, J. W. (2018). All roads lead to Rome: Towards understanding different avenues of tolerance to huanglongbing in citrus cultivars. Plant Physiology and Biochemistry, 129, 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plaphy.2018.05.005
Killiny, N., Valim, M. F., Jones, S. E., Omar, A. A., Hijaz, F., Gmitter, F. G., & Grosser, J. W. (2017). Metabolically speaking: Possible reasons behind the tolerance of ‘Sugar Belle’ mandarin hybrid to huanglongbing. Plant Physiology and Biochemistry, 116, 36–47. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plaphy.2017.05.001
Kim, J.-S., Sagaram, U. S., Burns, J. K., Li, J.-L., & Wang, N. (2009). Response of Sweet Orange ( Citrus sinensis ) to ‘ Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus’ Infection: Microscopy and Microarray Analyses. Phytopathology®, 99(1), 50–57. https://doi.org/10.1094/PHYTO-99-1-0050
Koh, E.-J., Zhou, L., Williams, D. S., Park, J., Ding, N., Duan, Y.-P., & Kang, B.-H. (2012). Callose deposition in the phloem plasmodesmata and inhibition of phloem transport in citrus leaves infected with “Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus.” Protoplasma, 249(3), 687–697. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00709-011-0312-3
Kumar, S. R., Gopal, K., Rajasekharam, T., Ruth, C., Balakrishna, M., Gopi, V., & Gowri, T. (2022). Application of chemicals and nutrients differs in bacterial titre of Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus on infected Citrus sinensis (L.) Osbeck. The Pharma Innovation, 11(8), 135–144. https://doi.org/10.22271/tpi.2022.v11.i8b.14978
Levy, A., Erlanger, M., Rosenthal, M., & Epel, B. L. (2007). A plasmodesmata-associated b -1 , 3-glucanase in Arabidopsis. 669–682. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-313X.2006.02986.x
Levy, A., Livingston, T., Wang, C., Achor, D., & Vashisth, T. (2023). Canopy Density, but Not Bacterial Titers, Predicts Fruit Yield in Huanglongbing-Affected Sweet Orange Trees. Plants, 12(2), 290. https://doi.org/10.3390/plants12020290
Li, S., & Vincent, C. (2022). Root:shoot balance controls flush phenology and carbohydrate translocation dynamics in citrus ( Citrus x sinensis ) trunk. Physiologia Plantarum, 174(1). https://doi.org/10.1111/ppl.13601
Liu, Y.-H., Song, Y.-H., & Ruan, Y.-L. (2022). Sugar conundrum in plant–pathogen interactions: roles of invertase and sugar transporters depend on pathosystems. Journal of Experimental Botany, 73(7), 1910–1925. https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/erab562
Livak, K. J., & Schmittgen, T. D. (2001). Analysis of Relative Gene Expression Data Using Real-Time Quantitative PCR and the 2−ΔΔCT Method. Methods, 25(4), 402–408. https://doi.org/10.1006/meth.2001.1262
Ma, W., Pang, Z., Huang, X., Xu, J., Pandey, S. S., Li, J., Achor, D. S., Vasconcelos, F. N. C., Hendrich, C., Huang, Y., Wang, W., Lee, D., Stanton, D., & Wang, N. (2022). Citrus Huanglongbing is a pathogen-triggered immune disease that can be mitigated with antioxidants and gibberellin. Nature Communications, 13(1), 529. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-28189-9
Martinelli, F., Reagan, R. L., Dolan, D., Fileccia, V., & Dandekar, A. M. (2016). Proteomic analysis highlights the role of detoxification pathways in increased tolerance to Huanglongbing disease. BMC Plant Biology, 16(1), 167. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12870-016-0858-5
Miles, G. P., Stover, E., Ramadugu, C., Keremane, M. L., & Lee, R. F. (2017). Apparent Tolerance to Huanglongbing in Citrus and Citrus-related Germplasm. HortScience, 52(1), 31–39. https://doi.org/10.21273/HORTSCI11374-16
Misas‐Villamil, J. C., Hoorn, R. A. L., & Doehlemann, G. (2016). Papain‐like cysteine proteases as hubs in plant immunity. New Phytologist, 212(4), 902–907. https://doi.org/10.1111/nph.14117
Murillo, I., Roca, R., Bortolotti, C., & Segundo, B. S. (2003). Engineering photoassimilate partitioning in tobacco plants improves growth and productivity and provides pathogen resistance. The Plant Journal, 36(3), 330–341. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-313X.2003.01880.x
Nardini, A., Salleo, S., & Jansen, S. (2011). More than just a vulnerable pipeline: xylem physiology in the light of ion-mediated regulation of plant water transport. Journal of Experimental Botany, 62(14), 4701–4718. https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/err208
Nehela, Y., & Killiny, N. (2020). Revisiting the Complex Pathosystem of Huanglongbing: Deciphering the Role of Citrus Metabolites in Symptom Development. Metabolites, 10(10), 409. https://doi.org/10.3390/metabo10100409
Niño, M. C., Kang, K. K., & Cho, Y.-G. (2020). Genome-wide transcriptional response of papain-like cysteine protease-mediated resistance against Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae in rice. Plant Cell Reports, 39(4), 457–472. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00299-019-02502-1
Pandey, S. S., Hendrich, C., Andrade, M. O., & Wang, N. (2022). Candidatus Liberibacter: From Movement, Host Responses, to Symptom Development of Citrus Huanglongbing. Phytopathology®, 112(1), 55–68. https://doi.org/10.1094/PHYTO-08-21-0354-FI
R Core Team. (2022). R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. In R Foundation for Statistical Computing. https://www.r-project.org/
Ramadugu, C., Keremane, M. L., Halbert, S. E., Duan, Y. P., Roose, M. L., Stover, E., & Lee, R. F. (2016). Long-Term Field Evaluation Reveals Huanglongbing Resistance in Citrus Relatives. Plant Disease, 100(9), 1858–1869. https://doi.org/10.1094/PDIS-03-16-0271-RE
Reinking, O. A. (1919). Diseases of economic plants in southern China. Philippine Agriculturist, 8(4).
Robertson, C. J., Zhang, X., Gowda, S., Orbović, V., Dawson, W. O., & Mou, Z. (2018). Overexpression of the Arabidopsis NPR1 protein in citrus confers tolerance to Huanglongbing. Journal of Citrus Pathology, 5(1). https://doi.org/10.5070/C451038911
Rodríguez-Gamir, J., Intrigliolo, D. S., Primo-Millo, E., & Forner-Giner, M. A. (2010). Relationships between xylem anatomy, root hydraulic conductivity, leaf/root ratio and transpiration in citrus trees on different rootstocks. Physiologia Plantarum, 139(2), 159–169. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1399-3054.2010.01351.x
Rojas, C. M., Senthil-Kumar, M., Tzin, V., & Mysore, K. S. (2014). Regulation of primary plant metabolism during plant-pathogen interactions and its contribution to plant defense. Frontiers in Plant Science, 5. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2014.00017
Schindelin, J., Arganda-Carreras, I., Frise, E., Kaynig, V., Longair, M., Pietzsch, T., Preibisch, S., Rueden, C., Saalfeld, S., Schmid, B., Tinevez, J.-Y., White, D. J., Hartenstein, V., Eliceiri, K., Tomancak, P., & Cardona, A. (2012). Fiji: an open-source platform for biological-image analysis. Nature Methods, 9(7), 676–682. https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.2019
Shahzad, F., Vashisth, T., Ritenour, M. A., & Brecht, J. K. (2023). Huanglongbing disease symptoms and the postharvest quality of ‘LB8-9’ (Sugar Belle®) and ‘Tango’ mandarins as affected by ethylene treatment. Scientia Horticulturae, 310, 111766. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scienta.2022.111766
Shen, W., Cevallos-Cevallos, J. M., Nunes da Rocha, U., Arevalo, H. A., Stansly, P. A., Roberts, P. D., & van Bruggen, A. H. C. (2013). Relation between plant nutrition, hormones, insecticide applications, bacterial endophytes, and Candidatus Liberibacter Ct values in citrus trees infected with Huanglongbing. European Journal of Plant Pathology, 137(4), 727–742. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10658-013-0283-7
Singerman, A., & Rogers, M. E. (2020). The Economic Challenges of Dealing with Citrus Greening: The Case of Florida. Journal of Integrated Pest Management, 11(1). https://doi.org/10.1093/jipm/pmz037
Stover, E., Inch, S., Richardson, M. L., & Hall, D. G. (2016). Conventional Citrus of Some Scion/Rootstock Combinations Show Field Tolerance under High Huanglongbing Disease Pressure. HortScience, 51(2), 127–132. https://doi.org/10.21273/HORTSCI.51.2.127
Stover, E., & McCollum, G. (2011). Incidence and Severity of Huanglongbing and Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus Titer among Field-infected Citrus Cultivars. HortScience, 46(10), 1344–1348. https://doi.org/10.21273/HORTSCI.46.10.1344
Tang, L., & Vashisth, T. (2020). New insight in Huanglongbing-associated mature fruit drop in citrus and its link to oxidative stress. Scientia Horticulturae, 265, 109246. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scienta.2020.109246
Tyree, M. T., & Ewers, F. W. (1991). The hydraulic architecture of trees and other woody plants. New Phytologist, 119(3), 345–360. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8137.1991.tb00035.x
Tyree, M. T., & Zimmermann, M. H. (2013). Xylem structure and the ascent of sap. Springer Science & Business Media.
U.S. Department of Agriculture. (2022). Commercial Citrus Inventory, Preliminary Report. National Agricultural Statistics Service (USDA-NASS). https://www.nass.usda.gov/Statistics_by_State/Florida/Publications/Citrus/Commercial_Citrus_Inventory/Commercial_Citrus_Inventory_Prelim/ccipr22a.pdf
Vincent, C., Minchin, P. E. H., & Liesche, J. (2019). Noninvasive Determination of Phloem Transport Speed with Carbon-14 (14C). In J. Liesche (Ed.), Phloem: methods and protocols (pp. 153–162). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-9562-2_13
Viteri, D. M., Estévez de Jensen, C., & Hernández, E. (2021). Response of Citrus spp. germplasm from Puerto Rico grafted on two rootstocks to early infection of huanglongbing. European Journal of Plant Pathology, 160(3), 589–597. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10658-021-02267-y
Wang, B., Andargie, M., & Fang, R. (2022). The function and biosynthesis of callose in high plants. Heliyon, 8(4), e09248. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2022.e09248
Wang, N., Pierson, E. A., Setubal, J. C., Xu, J., Levy, J. G., Zhang, Y., Li, J., Rangel, L. T., & Martins, J. (2017). The Candidatus Liberibacter–Host Interface: Insights into Pathogenesis Mechanisms and Disease Control. Annual Review of Phytopathology, 55(1), 451–482. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-phyto-080516-035513
Wang, N., & Trivedi, P. (2013). Citrus Huanglongbing: A Newly Relevant Disease Presents Unprecedented Challenges. Phytopathology®, 103(7), 652–665. https://doi.org/10.1094/PHYTO-12-12-0331-RVW
Wang, Z., Yin, Y., Hu, H., Yuan, Q., Peng, G., & Xia, Y. (2006). Development and application of molecular-based diagnosis for “Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus”, the causal pathogen of citrus huanglongbing. Plant Pathology, 55(5), 630–638. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-3059.2006.01438.x
Welker, S., & Levy, A. (2022). Comparing Machine Learning and Binary Thresholding Methods for Quantification of Callose Deposits in the Citrus Phloem. In Plants (Vol. 11, Issue 5). https://doi.org/10.3390/plants11050624
Welker, S., Pierre, M., Santiago, J. P., Dutt, M., Vincent, C., & Levy, A. (2021). Phloem transport limitation in Huanglongbing-affected sweet orange is dependent on phloem-limited bacteria and callose. In D. Epron (Ed.), Tree Physiology. https://doi.org/10.1093/treephys/tpab134
Welker, S., Pierre, M., Santiago, J. P., Dutt, M., Vincent, C., & Levy, A. (2022). Phloem transport limitation in Huanglongbing-affected sweet orange is dependent on phloem-limited bacteria and callose. Tree Physiology, 42(2), 379–390. https://doi.org/10.1093/treephys/tpab134
Wilcox, R. R. (2011). Introduction to robust estimation and hypothesis testing. Academic press.
Wolberg, S., Haim, M., & Shtein, I. (2023). Simple differential staining method of paraffin-embedded plant sections with safranin-alcian blue. IAWA Journal, 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1163/22941932-bja10124
Wulff, N., Daniel, B., Sassi, R., Moreira, A., Bassanezi, R., Sala, I., Coletti, D., & Rodrigues, J. (2020). Incidence of Diaphorina citri Carrying Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus in Brazil’s Citrus Belt. Insects, 11(10), 672. https://doi.org/10.3390/insects11100672
Zhang, R., Qi, H., Sun, Y., Xiao, S., & Lim, B. L. (2017). Transgenic Arabidopsis thaliana containing increased levels of ATP and sucrose is more susceptible to Pseudomonas syringae. PLOS ONE, 12(2), e0171040. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0171040



















Figure 1. A) 14CO2 fixation of infected plants with respect to healthy plants in the susceptible pineapple (PA) sweet orange and the tolerant Sugar Belle® (SB) mandarin. B) Relative gene expression of Ferredoxin – NADP reductase in leaves of different ages of healthy and infected PA and SB. C) 14C-carbohydrate export of infected plants with respect to healthy plants of PA and SB. D) Starch content of infected and healthy plants of PA and SB. The dashed lines (µ=0) represent the theoretical estimate obtained when values of healthy and infected plants within the same cultivar are equal. Yellow triangle depicts the mean. P-values in A, C, and D were obtained through Welche’s t-test. P-values in B were obtained through Wilcox’s test. In A and C means were compared to µ=0. Old leaves= 273 ± 30 days, medium leaves= 101.4 ± 22 days, and young leaves= 27.1 ± 9 days. Error bars indicate standard error. 


























Figure 2. A) Callose counts of infected and healthy plants in the susceptible Pineapple (PA) sweet orange and the tolerant Sugar Belle® (SB) mandarin. B)  Mean size of callose counts of infected and healthy PA and SB. C) Mean total area of callose counts of infected and healthy PA and SB. D) Mean distance to the closest neighbor of callose counts of PA and SB. E) Relative gene expression of callose synthase and glucanase genes in leaves of different ages of healthy and infected PA and SB. F and G) Images of Ilastik callose classification in the phloem of bark peels stained with aniline blue (scale bar= 200 µm) F.I.) Example of healthy PA showing more callose counts. F.II.) Example of infected PA showing greater mean size of callose counts. G.I.) Example of healthy SB showing less callose counts. G.II.) Example of infected SB showing bigger but transversally aggregated callose counts.  Yellow triangle depicts the mean. P-values in A, C, and D were obtained through Welche’s t-test. P-values in B and E were obtained through Wilcox’s test. Old leaves= 273 ± 30 days, medium leaves= 101.4 ± 22 days, and young leaves= 27.1 ± 9 days 

























Figure 3. A) Mean symptom severity score of infected Pineapple (PA) sweet orange and Sugar Belle® (SB) mandarin assessed by 15 evaluators. B)  Relative quantification of CLas genetic material of infected PA and SB. C) Relative gene expression of PLCPs and senesce related genes (CaAALP, CsRD19, and SRG1B) and defense (NPR1) genes in leaves of different ages of healthy and infected PA and SB. Grey lines between cultivars connects the mean values of the observations from the same evaluator. Yellow triangle depicts the mean. P-value in A was obtained through paired Welche’s t-test and B through a two tails Welche’s t-test. P-values in C were obtained through Wilcox’s test. Old leaves= 273 ± 30 days, medium leaves= 101.4 ± 22 days, and young leaves= 27.1 ± 9 days 





























Figure 4. A.I) Petiole sections of healthy and infected Pineapple (PA) sweet orange and Sugar Belle® (SB) mandarin (scale bar= 200 µm). A.II) Area of vascular bundles of petioles of healthy and infected PA and SB. B.I) Leaf midrib sections of healthy and infected PA and SB (scale bar= 100 µm). B.II) Area of vascular bundles of midribs of healthy and infected PA and SB. C.I) Comparison of HLB affected and healthy PA exhibited an increase variance in the xylem vessel morphometrics and diseased and healthy SB evidencing maintenance of xylem vessel’s morphometrics;  C.II to C.IV) Anatomical metrics of xylem vessels. In  A.I and B.I red, magenta and yellow depict the area of pith, xylem, and phloem, respectively. In C.I Xv: xylem vessel, Cs: cambium strip, Phv: Phloem sieve element, Php: phloem parenchyma. P-values in A.II were obtained through Wilcox’s test. P-value in B.II, C.II, and C.III were obtained through two tails Welche’s t-test. Error bars indicate standard error.


























Figure 5. A) Comparison of the relative changes generated by HLB between the susceptible Pineapple (PA) sweet orange and the tolerant Sugar Belle® (SB) mandarin through permutational test of means. Numbers on the SB panel are P values. *= variable compared through two sample t-test. **=variable compared through paired t-test.  




